1929 or 1989?
PARIS – As the economic crisis deepens and widens, the world has been searching for historical analogies to help us understand what has been happening.
At the start of the crisis, many people likened it to 1982 or 1973, which was reassuring, because both dates refer to classical cyclical downturns.
Today, the mood is much grimmer, with references to 1929 and 1931 beginning to abound, even if some governments continue to behave as if the crisis was more classical than exceptional.
The tendency is either excessive restraint (Europe) or a diffusion of the effort (the United States).
Europe is being cautious in the name of avoiding debt and defending the euro, whereas the US has moved on many fronts in order not to waste an ideal opportunity to implement badly needed structural reforms.
For geo-strategists, however, the year that naturally comes to mind, in both politics and economics, is 1989.
Of course, the fall of the house of Lehman Brothers has nothing to do with the fall of the Berlin Wall.
Indeed, on the surface it seems to be its perfect antithesis: the collapse of a wall symbolizing oppression and artificial divisions versus the collapse of a seemingly indestructible and reassuring institution of financial capitalism.
Yet 2008-2009, like 1989, may very well correspond to an epochal change, whose unfolding consequences will be felt for decades.
The end of the East-West ideological divide and the end of absolute faith in markets are historical turning points.
And what happens in 2009 may jeopardize some of the positive results of 1989, including the peaceful reunification of Europe and the triumph of democratic principles over nationalist, if not xenophobic, tendencies.
In 1989, liberal democracy triumphed over the socialist ideology incarnated and promoted by the Soviet Bloc.
For many of his supporters, it was President Ronald Reagan who, with his deliberate escalation of the arms race, pushed the Soviet economy to the brink, thereby fully demonstrating the superiority of liberal societies and free markets.
Of course, there are obvious differences between 1989 and now.
First, and perhaps above all, the revolutions of 1989 and the subsequent collapse of the Soviet Union put an end to global bipolarity.
By contrast, 2009 is likely to pave the way to a new form of bipolarity, but with China substituting for the Soviet Union.
Second, whereas democracy and market capitalism appeared as clear – if more fragile than expected – winners in 1989, it is difficult in 2009, with the spread of the global crisis, to distinguish winners from losers.
Everyone seems to be a loser, even if some are more affected than others.
Yet, history is unfair, and the US, despite its greater responsibility for today’s global crisis, may emerge in better shape than most countries from the morass.
In better shape, but not alone.
As a visiting professor at Harvard and MIT, I am getting a good preview of what the world could look like when the crisis finally passes.
One senses something like the making of an American-Asian dominated universe.
From the incredible media lab at MIT to the mathematics and economics departments at Harvard, Asians – Chinese and Indians, in particular – are everywhere, like the Romans in Athens in the first century BC: full of admiration for those from whom they were learning so much, and whom they would overcome in the coming decades.
But before this new order appears, the world may be faced with spreading disorder, if not outright chaos.
What, for example, will happen to a country as central and vulnerable as Egypt when hundred of thousands of Egyptians working in the Gulf are forced to return to their homeland as a result of the crisis in the oil-producing countries?
When the rich get less rich, the poor get poorer.
And what about the foreign workers who have reached for the “European dream” and are now faced with potential explosions of xenophobia in Europe’s supposedly open countries?
The consequences of 1989 ended up being less enduring than many observers, including me, would have assumed.
We can only hope that, in the end, the consequences of 2009 similarly prove to be far less dramatic than we now – intuitively and in our historical reflexes – feel them to be.
What Failed in 2008?
BERKELEY – To solve a problem, it is not enough to know what to do.
You actually have to implement the solution – and be willing to change course if it turns out that you did not know quite as much as you thought.
As a result, markets were deregulated, making it easier to trade assets that were perceived to be safe, but were in fact not.
As a result, systemic risk proliferated beyond central bankers’ wildest imagination.
Untested – and ultimately incorrect – assumptions created a policymaking environment defined by what can only be called hubris.
Officials underestimated tail risks.
They set inflation targets at around 2% – leaving little room for maneuver when the water got choppy.
And, most audaciously of all, the European Union introduced the euro as a common currency.
Indeed, wrongheaded policymaking continued long after the crisis began.
Politicians responded to worsening economic conditions by hewing as closely as possible to failed prescriptions, making sure to do no more than absolutely necessary to address the biggest economic disaster since the Great Depression.
Wolf’s prescription for countering the crisis is simple, smart, and unassailable.
In the short term, he suggests that countries with reserve currencies spend more (especially to finance public-sector investments) and issue more debt.
Their central banks, he argues, should raise inflation targets to 3% or even 4% per year.
Over the medium term, according to Wolf, countries need to put in place regulatory measures that lower debt levels and discourage overleveraging.
The eurozone, too, must resolve its internal contradictions, either by disbanding or by introducing “a minimum set of institutions and policies” that allow the monetary union to function properly.
Wolf’s long-term solutions include tackling inequality, “more global regulation,” a greater degree of “freedom for individual countries to craft their own responses,” and economic analysis that is less in thrall to the free-market ideologues that led us into the crisis in the first place.
And yet, as recommendable as Wolf’s proposals may be, little has been done to implement them.
The reasons why are found in the second book: Hall of Mirrors, by&nbsp;my friend, teacher, and patron, Barry Eichengreen.
Eichengreen traces our tepid response to the crisis to the triumph of monetarist economists, the disciples of Milton Friedman, over their Keynesian and Minskyite peers – at least when it comes to interpretations of the causes and consequences of the Great Depression.
When the 2008 financial crisis erupted, policymakers tried to apply Friedman’s proposed solutions to the Great Depression.
Unfortunately, this turned out to be the wrong thing to do, as the monetarist interpretation of the Great Depression was, to put it bluntly, wrong in significant respects and radically incomplete.
The resulting policies were enough to prevent the post-2008 recession from developing into a full-blown depression; but that partial success turned out to be a Pyrrhic victory, for it allowed politicians to declare that the crisis had been overcome, and that it was time to embrace austerity and focus on structural reform.
The result is today’s stagnant economy, marked by anemic growth that threatens to become the new normal.
The United States and Europe are on track to have thrown away 10% of their potential wealth, while the failure to strengthen financial-sector regulation has left the world economy exposed to the risk of another major crisis.
Wolf and Eichengreen would agree that the main shortcomings that led to the 2008 financial crisis – and that continue to underpin our inadequate response to it – are intellectual.
Indeed, the only true lesson of the crisis so far seems to be that its lessons will never truly be learned.
A Comeback Strategy for Europe
STOCKHOLM/MADRID – When Pope Francis addressed the European Parliament last November, he compared the European Union to a grandmother – pleasant and rich with experience, but lacking the vitality and energy of the past.
It is high time, Francis argued, that EU leaders shed their dozy image, recognize the strategic challenges that Europe faces, and forge a clear policy for tackling them.
Admittedly, the pope’s characterization was alarmingly accurate in some respects.
But, despite its seeming lassitude, Europe retains significant strengths.
It is a hub of high-level thought and innovation; it is home to some of the world’s most competitive regions and industries; and, perhaps most impressive, it has built a community and market encompassing a half-billion people.
But the world is changing: the Asia-Pacific region is increasingly influencing global developments, economic and otherwise.
The Trans-Pacific Partnership – by which the United States and 11 other countries would create a mega-regional free-trade zone – would most likely accelerate this shift (all the more so if China eventually joins).
Though the TPP faces no shortage of hurdles to clear before an agreement is finalized, its potential to augment Asia’s economic power cannot be underestimated.
Europe must work to secure its position in the new world order – beginning by enhancing its own trade and investment ties with the US.
The problem is that, as the TPP negotiations progress, talks on the EU-US Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) have become so deeply mired in domestic controversies that the entire project may well be scuttled.
Business leaders on both sides of the Atlantic are convinced that a successful TTIP agreement would bring substantial economic benefits – a perception that many studies reinforce.
Yet trivial issues – for example, the use of chlorinated chicken and settlements of investor disputes – continue to dominate the debate.
The TTIP’s goal is to unleash the power of the transatlantic economy, which remains by far the world’s largest and wealthiest market, accounting for three-quarters of global financial activity and more than half of world trade.
(If the TTIP was opened to other economies – such as Turkey, Mexico, and Canada – the benefits would be even greater.)
Even more compelling than the benefits of achieving an agreement, though, are the potentially catastrophic consequences of failure.
For starters, a breakdown of TTIP talks would give considerable ammunition to those in the United Kingdom who advocate withdrawal from the EU; conversely, if the TTIP were implemented, the UK would be unwise – and thus unlikely – to leave.
Moreover, the perception that the EU’s internal squabbles had led it to squander a strategic opportunity would probably drive the US to accelerate its disengagement from the continent.
And Russian President Vladimir Putin would invariably regard the EU’s failure as a major opportunity to exert more influence over parts of Europe.
All of this contributes to a starkly fundamental strategic risk: If the TTIP stalls or collapses, while the TPP moves forward and succeeds, the global balance will tip strongly in Asia’s favor – and Europe will have few options, if any, for regaining its economic and geopolitical influence.
When the TTIP was first proposed, Europe seemed to recognize its value.
Indeed, it was the EU that pushed the US, which initially doubted Europe’s commitment, to launch the negotiation process in June 2013.
The ambition was to complete the negotiations on “one tank of gas.”
No one wanted to endure protracted talks – or the associated political pain.
But EU leaders essentially abandoned the project, seemingly confirming American fears.
Trade negotiators struggled to make headway, while anti-globalization groups seized control of the public discourse, presenting the TTIP as a threat to everything from Europe’s democracy to its health.
This is dangerously inaccurate talk, and EU leaders must prevent it from gaining any more traction by making the strategic case for the agreement.
And they must revive their commitment to conclude the talks successfully in 2015.
This is not to say that resolving the remaining issues in the TTIP negotiations will be simple.
But establishing a trade agreement, especially one that entails so many regulatory issues, is always difficult, as it must account for the complexity and changeability of modern economies.
The fact is that the challenges inherent in completing the TTIP are no more intractable than those that EU leaders have faced in the last few years of crisis.
When the TTIP negotiations resume next month, EU leaders must push for genuine progress, with the goal of completing a deal by the end of the year.
The good news is that the recent midterm elections in the US might have improved their chances.
President Barack Obama now might get so-called fast-track negotiating authority from Congress.
If he does, Congress would simply approve or reject any negotiated agreement, rather than picking it apart.
The US presidential election season is starting, and other issues in the new year could easily take over the EU agenda.
That is why Europe’s leaders have no time to waste.
They must seize economic opportunity – and avert strategic disaster.
The Year That Ended an Epoch?
MADRID – As 2016 comes to an end, the outlook for 2017 is shrouded in uncertainty.
Tensions in the Middle East are rising, and populist movements have appeared in Europe and the United States.
In the Middle East, the tragic conflict in Syria continues, despite several fruitless attempts at rapprochement, which were marred by the fundamental disagreement about Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s future role in any peace process or political transition.
Meanwhile, over the past week, Syrian government troops, backed by Russia and Iran, have retaken almost all of Aleppo – once Syria’s largest city, now utterly devastated by the war.
The world’s priority for the coming year must be to achieve peace in Syria, which will require close regional and international cooperation.
On December 27, Iran, Russia, and Turkey will hold a tripartite meeting in Moscow to discuss a political solution for the Syria conflict.
That meeting, if it takes place, is likely to be overshadowed by the fallout from the assassination of Russia’s ambassador to Turkey.
But it is nothing if not surprising that these parties, and not the US and the European Union, would be negotiating such an agreement.
One positive development this year came in March, when the EU and Turkey signed an agreement to address the refugee crisis.
Turkey has now taken in some three million Syrian refugees since the beginning of the conflict.
Although EU-Turkey relations are currently not at their best, the dialogue between the two sides must continue in 2017, not least because of their common interests, which are based not only on economic interdependence, but also on the refugee crisis and the collective fight against terrorism.
European politics next year, meanwhile, will be consumed by the Brexit negotiations.
In March, the United Kingdom will likely invoke Article 50 of the Treaty of Lisbon, triggering the formal procedure for withdrawal from the EU.
The challenge will be to reach an agreement that guarantees the wellbeing of future EU-UK relations.
This will not be easy, and EU negotiators have already set a timeline of only 18 months.
While much remains uncertain, what is clear is that if the UK wants to retain access to the European single market, it will have to accept the EU’s four freedoms, including the free movement of workers.
In 2017, several European countries will hold general elections, and there is a risk that isolationist, anti-European populist movements will make a strong showing.
For the EU to lose a country as militarily and economically important as the UK is bad enough; but to lose a founding EU member state, such as France, would be tragic.
Fortunately, many Europeans’ views toward the EU actually improved in the aftermath of the Brexit referendum.
But this will not lessen the challenge for EU governments in the year ahead.
They must unite societies divided by powerful global forces, such as globalization and rapid technological innovation.
The Brexit referendum, followed by Donald Trump’s victory in the US presidential election, signaled the rise of populism in the West.
But now that Trump is filling his cabinet with oligarchs and former military men, we have reason to doubt that he will keep his promise to govern without the Washington “establishment.”
Trump’s incoming administration is full of unknowns, but there can be no doubt that his rejection of multilateral institutions will endanger international efforts to cooperate on solutions to the world’s biggest problems.
This holds peril for US-EU relations.
In previous years, the Paris climate agreement and the nuclear agreement with Iran were rays of light in a world closing itself off to multilateralism.
In the coming years, such rays may become scarcer still.
Now more than ever, we need the kind of dialogue that builds strategic trust between great powers.
And yet, Trump’s statements casting doubt on continued US adherence to a “One China” policy vis-à-vis Taiwan could severely damage relations between the world’s two largest economies.
Similarly, notwithstanding the pro-Russian leanings of some among Trump’s team, the US-Russian relationship also lacks strategic trust, owing to Russia’s military intervention in Syria, its invasion of eastern Ukraine, and its alleged interference in the US election.
The coming year will be particularly important for Europe.
Relations between the EU and the US must remain strong, rooted in mutual respect for democracy, freedom, and human rights.
After a turbulent 2016, and with little positive news in international politics, 2017 is shaping up to be a year of challenges and uncertainty.
But the biggest uncertainty of all is whether this is simply the end of another year, or the end of a geopolitical epoch.
Another Slow Year for the Global Economy
WASHINGTON, DC – Last April, the International Monetary Fund projected that the world economy would grow by 3.5% in 2015.
In the ensuing months, that forecast was steadily whittled down, reaching 3.1% in October.
But the IMF continues to insist – as it has, with almost banal predictability, for the last seven years – that next year will be better.
But it is almost certainly wrong yet again.
For starters, world trade is growing at an anemic annual rate of 2%, compared to 8% from 2003 to 2007.
Whereas trade growth during those heady years far exceeded that of world GDP, which averaged 4.5%, lately, trade and GDP growth rates have been about the same.
Even if GDP growth outstrips growth in trade this year, it will likely amount to no more than 2.7%.
The question is why.
According to Christina and David Romer of the University of California, Berkeley, the aftershocks of modern financial crises – that is, since World War II – fade after 2-3 years.
The Harvard economists Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff say that it takes five years for a country to dig itself out of a financial crisis.
And, indeed, the financial dislocations of 2007-2008 have largely receded.
So what accounts for the sluggish economic recovery?
One popular explanation lies in the fuzzy notion of “secular stagnation”: long-term depressed demand for goods and services is undermining incentives to invest and hire.
But demand would remain weak only if people lacked confidence in the future.
The only logical explanation for this enduring lack of confidence, as Northwestern University’s Robert Gordon has painstakingly documented and argued, is slow productivity growth.
Before the crisis – and especially from 2003 to 2007 – slow productivity growth was being obscured by an illusory sense of prosperity in much of the world.
In some countries – notably, the United States, Spain, and Ireland – rising real-estate prices, speculative construction, and financial risk-taking were mutually reinforcing.
At the same time, countries were amplifying one another’s growth through trade.
Central to the global boom was China, the rising giant that flooded the world with cheap exports, putting a lid on global inflation.
Equally important, China imported a huge volume of commodities, thereby bolstering many African and Latin American economies, and purchased German cars and machines, enabling Europe’s largest economy to keep its regional supply chains humming.
This dynamic reversed around March 2008, when the US rescued its fifth-largest investment bank, Bear Sterns, from collapse.
With the eurozone banks also deeply implicated in the subprime mortgage mess and desperately short of US dollars, America and much of Europe began a remorseless slide into recession.
Whereas in the boom years, world trade had spread the bounty, it was now spreading the malaise.
As each country’s GDP growth slowed, so did its imports, causing its trading partners’ growth to slow as well.
The US economy began to emerge from its recession in the second half of 2009, thanks largely to aggressive monetary policy and steps to stabilize the financial system.
Eurozone policymakers, by contrast, rejected monetary stimulus and implemented fiscal austerity measures, while ignoring the deepening distress of their banks.
The eurozone thus pushed the world into a second global recession.
Just when that recession seemed to have run its course, emerging economies began to unravel.
For years, observers had been touting the governance and growth-enhancing reforms that these countries’ leaders had supposedly introduced.
In October 2012, the IMF celebrated emerging economies’ “resilience.”
As if on cue, that facade began to crumble, revealing an inconvenient truth: factors like high commodity prices and massive capital inflows had been concealing serious economic weaknesses, while legitimizing a culture of garish inequality and rampant corruption.
These problems are now being compounded by the growth slowdown in China, the fulcrum of global trade.
And the worst is yet to come.
China’s huge industrial overcapacity and property glut needs to be wound down; the hubris driving its global acquisitions must be reined in; and its corruption networks have to be dismantled.
In short, the factors that dragged down the global economy in 2015 will persist – and in some cases even intensify – in the new year.
Emerging economies will remain weak.
The eurozone, having enjoyed a temporary reprieve from austerity, will be constrained by listless global trade.
Rising interest rates on corporate bonds portend slower growth in the US.
China’s collapsing asset values could trigger financial turbulence.
And policymakers are adrift, with little political leverage to stem these trends.
The IMF should stop forecasting renewed growth and issue a warning that the global economy will remain weak and vulnerable unless world leaders act energetically to spur innovation and growth.
Such an effort is long overdue.
Трамптық белгісіздік
НЬЮ-ЙОРК – Әрбір қаңтар айында, мен алдағы жылға арналған болжамды дайындай бастаймын.
Экономикалық болжау дайындау оңай іс емес; алайда, Гарри Трумэннің бір қолды экономисттердің болуына («екінші жағынан» деп айта алмайтын) өтінішінде шындықтың барына қарамастан, менің болжамдарым дұрыс болды деп айта аламын.
Соңғы жылдары, мен күшті фискалдық ынталандыру болмаған жағдайда, (Еуропада немесе Америка Құрама Штаттарында жақын арада болжанбаған) 2008 жылдың Ұлы құлдырауынан сауығу баяу болады деп дұрыс таптым.
Осы болжамдарды жасаған кезде мен кешенді эконометрикалық модельдерге қарағанда базалық экономикалық күштерді талдауға толығырақ сүйенген болатынмын.
Мысалы, 2016 жылдың басында, соңғы бірнеше жыл бойы орын алған жаһандық жиынтық сұраныстың тапшылығының күрт өзгеруі екіталай екені анық көрінді. Сондықтан, мен әсерлі қалыпқа келуді болжағандар туралы олар әлемді тым жақсы жағынан көріп, кемшіліктерді ескермей жатыр деп ойладым.
Мен күткендей, көптеген экономикалық даму жағдайлары орын алды.
Бірақ, 2016 жылдың саяси оқиғалары олай жайлы болмады.
Мен, өсіп келе жатқан теңсіздік мәселесі, әсіресе АҚШ-та, сондай-ақ бүкіл әлем бойынша көптеген елдерде, шешілмесе, онда оның саяси салдары болатыны туралы көптеген жылдар бойы жазып келдім.
Бірақ теңсіздікке байланысты жағдай нашарлай бастады, тіпті АҚШ-та орташа өмір сүру ұзақтығы қысқаруда деген шошынышты деректер де белгілі болды.
Энн Кейс  және Ангус Дитонның өткен жылғы зерттеуінде айтылғандай, тұрғын халықтың үлкен сегменттерінде өмір сүру ұзақтығы қысқаруда, онын ішінде Американың Тот белдеуінің ашулы ерлері де бар.
Бірақ, табысы төмендердің 90%-ы ғасырдың үштен бірі бойы тоқырауда болған (және елеулі бөлігі төмендеп жатқан) жағдайда, денсаулық сақтау деректеріне жүгінсек, еліміздің өте үлкен бөлігінің жағдайы нашар.
Америка бұл үрдістің басында болғанымен, басқа жерлерде жағдай бұдан аса жақсы емес.
Саяси салдардың болуы анық көрінгенімен, олардың нысаны мен мерзімдері әлдеқайда айқын болмады.
Бұрын емес, ал дәл экономика түзетіліп келе жатқанда, АҚШ-та неге саяси қарсылық пайда болды?
Және неге ол оңға қарай бет алды?
Негізі, өздері қатты жақтаған  жаһандану нәтижесінде жұмыс орындарын жоғалтқан адамдарға ұсынылатын көмекті бұғаттаған республикашылдар болды. 26 штатта, медициналық көмекті кеңейтуге республиканшылдар қарсы болып, осылайша жағдайлары төмен адамдарға медициналық сақтандыру берілмеді.
Және басқаларды пайдалана отырып өмір сүрген, ашық түрде салықты төлемегенін мойындап және салықтан жалтаруды мақтаныш қылған біреу қалайша жеңіске жетті?
Дональд Трамп заман үрдісін дәл тапты: жағдай жақсы болмады, және көптеген сайлаушылар өзгерісті қалады.
Енді олардың тілегі орындалады- ешқандай іс әдеттегідей болмайды. Бірақ мұндай белгісіздік әлі болмаған.
Трамп қандай саясат жүргізетіні, олардың қайсысы табысқа жетеді немесе  олардың салдары қандай болады - мұның бәрі белгісіз болып тұр.
Трамп қалай болса да сауда соғысын жасайтындай.
Бірақ Қытай мен Мексика қандай жауап қайтарады?
Трамп өзінің ұсыныстары Дүниежүзілік сауда ұйымы ережесін бұзатынын түсінуі-ақ мүмкін, бірақ ол сондай-ақ, ДСҰ оған қарсы шығуы үшін ұзақ уақыт қажет екенін білетін шығар.
Ал ол уақытқа дейін, Американың сауда шоты қайта балансқа келуі мүмкін.
Бірақ бұл ойынды екі жақ та ойнай алады: Қытай, ұқсас әрекеттерді жасай алады, бірақ оның жауабы шеберлеу болуы мүмкін.
Бірақ сауда соғысы орын алса, қандай болар еді?