1929 or 1989?
PARIS – As the economic crisis deepens and widens, the world has been searching for historical analogies to help us understand what has been happening.
At the start of the crisis, many people likened it to 1982 or 1973, which was reassuring, because both dates refer to classical cyclical downturns.
Today, the mood is much grimmer, with references to 1929 and 1931 beginning to abound, even if some governments continue to behave as if the crisis was more classical than exceptional.
The tendency is either excessive restraint (Europe) or a diffusion of the effort (the United States).
Europe is being cautious in the name of avoiding debt and defending the euro, whereas the US has moved on many fronts in order not to waste an ideal opportunity to implement badly needed structural reforms.
For geo-strategists, however, the year that naturally comes to mind, in both politics and economics, is 1989.
Of course, the fall of the house of Lehman Brothers has nothing to do with the fall of the Berlin Wall.
Indeed, on the surface it seems to be its perfect antithesis: the collapse of a wall symbolizing oppression and artificial divisions versus the collapse of a seemingly indestructible and reassuring institution of financial capitalism.
Yet 2008-2009, like 1989, may very well correspond to an epochal change, whose unfolding consequences will be felt for decades.
The end of the East-West ideological divide and the end of absolute faith in markets are historical turning points.
And what happens in 2009 may jeopardize some of the positive results of 1989, including the peaceful reunification of Europe and the triumph of democratic principles over nationalist, if not xenophobic, tendencies.
In 1989, liberal democracy triumphed over the socialist ideology incarnated and promoted by the Soviet Bloc.
For many of his supporters, it was President Ronald Reagan who, with his deliberate escalation of the arms race, pushed the Soviet economy to the brink, thereby fully demonstrating the superiority of liberal societies and free markets.
Of course, there are obvious differences between 1989 and now.
First, and perhaps above all, the revolutions of 1989 and the subsequent collapse of the Soviet Union put an end to global bipolarity.
By contrast, 2009 is likely to pave the way to a new form of bipolarity, but with China substituting for the Soviet Union.
Second, whereas democracy and market capitalism appeared as clear – if more fragile than expected – winners in 1989, it is difficult in 2009, with the spread of the global crisis, to distinguish winners from losers.
Everyone seems to be a loser, even if some are more affected than others.
Yet, history is unfair, and the US, despite its greater responsibility for today’s global crisis, may emerge in better shape than most countries from the morass.
In better shape, but not alone.
As a visiting professor at Harvard and MIT, I am getting a good preview of what the world could look like when the crisis finally passes.
One senses something like the making of an American-Asian dominated universe.
From the incredible media lab at MIT to the mathematics and economics departments at Harvard, Asians – Chinese and Indians, in particular – are everywhere, like the Romans in Athens in the first century BC: full of admiration for those from whom they were learning so much, and whom they would overcome in the coming decades.
But before this new order appears, the world may be faced with spreading disorder, if not outright chaos.
What, for example, will happen to a country as central and vulnerable as Egypt when hundred of thousands of Egyptians working in the Gulf are forced to return to their homeland as a result of the crisis in the oil-producing countries?
When the rich get less rich, the poor get poorer.
And what about the foreign workers who have reached for the “European dream” and are now faced with potential explosions of xenophobia in Europe’s supposedly open countries?
The consequences of 1989 ended up being less enduring than many observers, including me, would have assumed.
We can only hope that, in the end, the consequences of 2009 similarly prove to be far less dramatic than we now – intuitively and in our historical reflexes – feel them to be.
What Failed in 2008?
BERKELEY – To solve a problem, it is not enough to know what to do.
You actually have to implement the solution – and be willing to change course if it turns out that you did not know quite as much as you thought.
As a result, markets were deregulated, making it easier to trade assets that were perceived to be safe, but were in fact not.
As a result, systemic risk proliferated beyond central bankers’ wildest imagination.
Untested – and ultimately incorrect – assumptions created a policymaking environment defined by what can only be called hubris.
Officials underestimated tail risks.
They set inflation targets at around 2% – leaving little room for maneuver when the water got choppy.
And, most audaciously of all, the European Union introduced the euro as a common currency.
Indeed, wrongheaded policymaking continued long after the crisis began.
Politicians responded to worsening economic conditions by hewing as closely as possible to failed prescriptions, making sure to do no more than absolutely necessary to address the biggest economic disaster since the Great Depression.
Wolf’s prescription for countering the crisis is simple, smart, and unassailable.
In the short term, he suggests that countries with reserve currencies spend more (especially to finance public-sector investments) and issue more debt.
Their central banks, he argues, should raise inflation targets to 3% or even 4% per year.
Over the medium term, according to Wolf, countries need to put in place regulatory measures that lower debt levels and discourage overleveraging.
The eurozone, too, must resolve its internal contradictions, either by disbanding or by introducing “a minimum set of institutions and policies” that allow the monetary union to function properly.
Wolf’s long-term solutions include tackling inequality, “more global regulation,” a greater degree of “freedom for individual countries to craft their own responses,” and economic analysis that is less in thrall to the free-market ideologues that led us into the crisis in the first place.
And yet, as recommendable as Wolf’s proposals may be, little has been done to implement them.
The reasons why are found in the second book: Hall of Mirrors, by&nbsp;my friend, teacher, and patron, Barry Eichengreen.
Eichengreen traces our tepid response to the crisis to the triumph of monetarist economists, the disciples of Milton Friedman, over their Keynesian and Minskyite peers – at least when it comes to interpretations of the causes and consequences of the Great Depression.
When the 2008 financial crisis erupted, policymakers tried to apply Friedman’s proposed solutions to the Great Depression.
Unfortunately, this turned out to be the wrong thing to do, as the monetarist interpretation of the Great Depression was, to put it bluntly, wrong in significant respects and radically incomplete.
The resulting policies were enough to prevent the post-2008 recession from developing into a full-blown depression; but that partial success turned out to be a Pyrrhic victory, for it allowed politicians to declare that the crisis had been overcome, and that it was time to embrace austerity and focus on structural reform.
The result is today’s stagnant economy, marked by anemic growth that threatens to become the new normal.
The United States and Europe are on track to have thrown away 10% of their potential wealth, while the failure to strengthen financial-sector regulation has left the world economy exposed to the risk of another major crisis.
Wolf and Eichengreen would agree that the main shortcomings that led to the 2008 financial crisis – and that continue to underpin our inadequate response to it – are intellectual.
Indeed, the only true lesson of the crisis so far seems to be that its lessons will never truly be learned.
A Comeback Strategy for Europe
STOCKHOLM/MADRID – When Pope Francis addressed the European Parliament last November, he compared the European Union to a grandmother – pleasant and rich with experience, but lacking the vitality and energy of the past.
It is high time, Francis argued, that EU leaders shed their dozy image, recognize the strategic challenges that Europe faces, and forge a clear policy for tackling them.
Admittedly, the pope’s characterization was alarmingly accurate in some respects.
But, despite its seeming lassitude, Europe retains significant strengths.
It is a hub of high-level thought and innovation; it is home to some of the world’s most competitive regions and industries; and, perhaps most impressive, it has built a community and market encompassing a half-billion people.
But the world is changing: the Asia-Pacific region is increasingly influencing global developments, economic and otherwise.
The Trans-Pacific Partnership – by which the United States and 11 other countries would create a mega-regional free-trade zone – would most likely accelerate this shift (all the more so if China eventually joins).
Though the TPP faces no shortage of hurdles to clear before an agreement is finalized, its potential to augment Asia’s economic power cannot be underestimated.
Europe must work to secure its position in the new world order – beginning by enhancing its own trade and investment ties with the US.
The problem is that, as the TPP negotiations progress, talks on the EU-US Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) have become so deeply mired in domestic controversies that the entire project may well be scuttled.
Business leaders on both sides of the Atlantic are convinced that a successful TTIP agreement would bring substantial economic benefits – a perception that many studies reinforce.
Yet trivial issues – for example, the use of chlorinated chicken and settlements of investor disputes – continue to dominate the debate.
The TTIP’s goal is to unleash the power of the transatlantic economy, which remains by far the world’s largest and wealthiest market, accounting for three-quarters of global financial activity and more than half of world trade.
(If the TTIP was opened to other economies – such as Turkey, Mexico, and Canada – the benefits would be even greater.)
Even more compelling than the benefits of achieving an agreement, though, are the potentially catastrophic consequences of failure.
For starters, a breakdown of TTIP talks would give considerable ammunition to those in the United Kingdom who advocate withdrawal from the EU; conversely, if the TTIP were implemented, the UK would be unwise – and thus unlikely – to leave.
Moreover, the perception that the EU’s internal squabbles had led it to squander a strategic opportunity would probably drive the US to accelerate its disengagement from the continent.
And Russian President Vladimir Putin would invariably regard the EU’s failure as a major opportunity to exert more influence over parts of Europe.
All of this contributes to a starkly fundamental strategic risk: If the TTIP stalls or collapses, while the TPP moves forward and succeeds, the global balance will tip strongly in Asia’s favor – and Europe will have few options, if any, for regaining its economic and geopolitical influence.
When the TTIP was first proposed, Europe seemed to recognize its value.
Indeed, it was the EU that pushed the US, which initially doubted Europe’s commitment, to launch the negotiation process in June 2013.
The ambition was to complete the negotiations on “one tank of gas.”
No one wanted to endure protracted talks – or the associated political pain.
But EU leaders essentially abandoned the project, seemingly confirming American fears.
Trade negotiators struggled to make headway, while anti-globalization groups seized control of the public discourse, presenting the TTIP as a threat to everything from Europe’s democracy to its health.
This is dangerously inaccurate talk, and EU leaders must prevent it from gaining any more traction by making the strategic case for the agreement.
And they must revive their commitment to conclude the talks successfully in 2015.
This is not to say that resolving the remaining issues in the TTIP negotiations will be simple.
But establishing a trade agreement, especially one that entails so many regulatory issues, is always difficult, as it must account for the complexity and changeability of modern economies.
The fact is that the challenges inherent in completing the TTIP are no more intractable than those that EU leaders have faced in the last few years of crisis.
When the TTIP negotiations resume next month, EU leaders must push for genuine progress, with the goal of completing a deal by the end of the year.
The good news is that the recent midterm elections in the US might have improved their chances.
President Barack Obama now might get so-called fast-track negotiating authority from Congress.
If he does, Congress would simply approve or reject any negotiated agreement, rather than picking it apart.
The US presidential election season is starting, and other issues in the new year could easily take over the EU agenda.
That is why Europe’s leaders have no time to waste.
They must seize economic opportunity – and avert strategic disaster.
The Year That Ended an Epoch?
MADRID – As 2016 comes to an end, the outlook for 2017 is shrouded in uncertainty.
Tensions in the Middle East are rising, and populist movements have appeared in Europe and the United States.
In the Middle East, the tragic conflict in Syria continues, despite several fruitless attempts at rapprochement, which were marred by the fundamental disagreement about Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s future role in any peace process or political transition.
Meanwhile, over the past week, Syrian government troops, backed by Russia and Iran, have retaken almost all of Aleppo – once Syria’s largest city, now utterly devastated by the war.
The world’s priority for the coming year must be to achieve peace in Syria, which will require close regional and international cooperation.
On December 27, Iran, Russia, and Turkey will hold a tripartite meeting in Moscow to discuss a political solution for the Syria conflict.
That meeting, if it takes place, is likely to be overshadowed by the fallout from the assassination of Russia’s ambassador to Turkey.
But it is nothing if not surprising that these parties, and not the US and the European Union, would be negotiating such an agreement.
One positive development this year came in March, when the EU and Turkey signed an agreement to address the refugee crisis.
Turkey has now taken in some three million Syrian refugees since the beginning of the conflict.
Although EU-Turkey relations are currently not at their best, the dialogue between the two sides must continue in 2017, not least because of their common interests, which are based not only on economic interdependence, but also on the refugee crisis and the collective fight against terrorism.
European politics next year, meanwhile, will be consumed by the Brexit negotiations.
In March, the United Kingdom will likely invoke Article 50 of the Treaty of Lisbon, triggering the formal procedure for withdrawal from the EU.
The challenge will be to reach an agreement that guarantees the wellbeing of future EU-UK relations.
This will not be easy, and EU negotiators have already set a timeline of only 18 months.
While much remains uncertain, what is clear is that if the UK wants to retain access to the European single market, it will have to accept the EU’s four freedoms, including the free movement of workers.
In 2017, several European countries will hold general elections, and there is a risk that isolationist, anti-European populist movements will make a strong showing.
For the EU to lose a country as militarily and economically important as the UK is bad enough; but to lose a founding EU member state, such as France, would be tragic.
Fortunately, many Europeans’ views toward the EU actually improved in the aftermath of the Brexit referendum.
But this will not lessen the challenge for EU governments in the year ahead.
They must unite societies divided by powerful global forces, such as globalization and rapid technological innovation.
The Brexit referendum, followed by Donald Trump’s victory in the US presidential election, signaled the rise of populism in the West.
But now that Trump is filling his cabinet with oligarchs and former military men, we have reason to doubt that he will keep his promise to govern without the Washington “establishment.”
Trump’s incoming administration is full of unknowns, but there can be no doubt that his rejection of multilateral institutions will endanger international efforts to cooperate on solutions to the world’s biggest problems.
This holds peril for US-EU relations.
In previous years, the Paris climate agreement and the nuclear agreement with Iran were rays of light in a world closing itself off to multilateralism.
In the coming years, such rays may become scarcer still.
Now more than ever, we need the kind of dialogue that builds strategic trust between great powers.
And yet, Trump’s statements casting doubt on continued US adherence to a “One China” policy vis-à-vis Taiwan could severely damage relations between the world’s two largest economies.
Similarly, notwithstanding the pro-Russian leanings of some among Trump’s team, the US-Russian relationship also lacks strategic trust, owing to Russia’s military intervention in Syria, its invasion of eastern Ukraine, and its alleged interference in the US election.
The coming year will be particularly important for Europe.
Relations between the EU and the US must remain strong, rooted in mutual respect for democracy, freedom, and human rights.
After a turbulent 2016, and with little positive news in international politics, 2017 is shaping up to be a year of challenges and uncertainty.
But the biggest uncertainty of all is whether this is simply the end of another year, or the end of a geopolitical epoch.
Another Slow Year for the Global Economy
WASHINGTON, DC – Last April, the International Monetary Fund projected that the world economy would grow by 3.5% in 2015.
In the ensuing months, that forecast was steadily whittled down, reaching 3.1% in October.
But the IMF continues to insist – as it has, with almost banal predictability, for the last seven years – that next year will be better.
But it is almost certainly wrong yet again.
For starters, world trade is growing at an anemic annual rate of 2%, compared to 8% from 2003 to 2007.
Whereas trade growth during those heady years far exceeded that of world GDP, which averaged 4.5%, lately, trade and GDP growth rates have been about the same.
Even if GDP growth outstrips growth in trade this year, it will likely amount to no more than 2.7%.
The question is why.
According to Christina and David Romer of the University of California, Berkeley, the aftershocks of modern financial crises – that is, since World War II – fade after 2-3 years.
The Harvard economists Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff say that it takes five years for a country to dig itself out of a financial crisis.
And, indeed, the financial dislocations of 2007-2008 have largely receded.
So what accounts for the sluggish economic recovery?
One popular explanation lies in the fuzzy notion of “secular stagnation”: long-term depressed demand for goods and services is undermining incentives to invest and hire.
But demand would remain weak only if people lacked confidence in the future.
The only logical explanation for this enduring lack of confidence, as Northwestern University’s Robert Gordon has painstakingly documented and argued, is slow productivity growth.
Before the crisis – and especially from 2003 to 2007 – slow productivity growth was being obscured by an illusory sense of prosperity in much of the world.
In some countries – notably, the United States, Spain, and Ireland – rising real-estate prices, speculative construction, and financial risk-taking were mutually reinforcing.
At the same time, countries were amplifying one another’s growth through trade.
Central to the global boom was China, the rising giant that flooded the world with cheap exports, putting a lid on global inflation.
Equally important, China imported a huge volume of commodities, thereby bolstering many African and Latin American economies, and purchased German cars and machines, enabling Europe’s largest economy to keep its regional supply chains humming.
This dynamic reversed around March 2008, when the US rescued its fifth-largest investment bank, Bear Sterns, from collapse.
With the eurozone banks also deeply implicated in the subprime mortgage mess and desperately short of US dollars, America and much of Europe began a remorseless slide into recession.
Whereas in the boom years, world trade had spread the bounty, it was now spreading the malaise.
As each country’s GDP growth slowed, so did its imports, causing its trading partners’ growth to slow as well.
The US economy began to emerge from its recession in the second half of 2009, thanks largely to aggressive monetary policy and steps to stabilize the financial system.
Eurozone policymakers, by contrast, rejected monetary stimulus and implemented fiscal austerity measures, while ignoring the deepening distress of their banks.
The eurozone thus pushed the world into a second global recession.
Just when that recession seemed to have run its course, emerging economies began to unravel.
For years, observers had been touting the governance and growth-enhancing reforms that these countries’ leaders had supposedly introduced.
In October 2012, the IMF celebrated emerging economies’ “resilience.”
As if on cue, that facade began to crumble, revealing an inconvenient truth: factors like high commodity prices and massive capital inflows had been concealing serious economic weaknesses, while legitimizing a culture of garish inequality and rampant corruption.
These problems are now being compounded by the growth slowdown in China, the fulcrum of global trade.
And the worst is yet to come.
China’s huge industrial overcapacity and property glut needs to be wound down; the hubris driving its global acquisitions must be reined in; and its corruption networks have to be dismantled.
In short, the factors that dragged down the global economy in 2015 will persist – and in some cases even intensify – in the new year.
Emerging economies will remain weak.
The eurozone, having enjoyed a temporary reprieve from austerity, will be constrained by listless global trade.
Rising interest rates on corporate bonds portend slower growth in the US.
China’s collapsing asset values could trigger financial turbulence.
And policymakers are adrift, with little political leverage to stem these trends.
The IMF should stop forecasting renewed growth and issue a warning that the global economy will remain weak and vulnerable unless world leaders act energetically to spur innovation and growth.
Such an effort is long overdue.
Трамптық белгісіздік
НЬЮ-ЙОРК – Әрбір қаңтар айында, мен алдағы жылға арналған болжамды дайындай бастаймын.
Экономикалық болжау дайындау оңай іс емес; алайда, Гарри Трумэннің бір қолды экономисттердің болуына («екінші жағынан» деп айта алмайтын) өтінішінде шындықтың барына қарамастан, менің болжамдарым дұрыс болды деп айта аламын.
Соңғы жылдары, мен күшті фискалдық ынталандыру болмаған жағдайда, (Еуропада немесе Америка Құрама Штаттарында жақын арада болжанбаған) 2008 жылдың Ұлы құлдырауынан сауығу баяу болады деп дұрыс таптым.
Осы болжамдарды жасаған кезде мен кешенді эконометрикалық модельдерге қарағанда базалық экономикалық күштерді талдауға толығырақ сүйенген болатынмын.
Мысалы, 2016 жылдың басында, соңғы бірнеше жыл бойы орын алған жаһандық жиынтық сұраныстың тапшылығының күрт өзгеруі екіталай екені анық көрінді. Сондықтан, мен әсерлі қалыпқа келуді болжағандар туралы олар әлемді тым жақсы жағынан көріп, кемшіліктерді ескермей жатыр деп ойладым.
Мен күткендей, көптеген экономикалық даму жағдайлары орын алды.
Бірақ, 2016 жылдың саяси оқиғалары олай жайлы болмады.
Мен, өсіп келе жатқан теңсіздік мәселесі, әсіресе АҚШ-та, сондай-ақ бүкіл әлем бойынша көптеген елдерде, шешілмесе, онда оның саяси салдары болатыны туралы көптеген жылдар бойы жазып келдім.
Бірақ теңсіздікке байланысты жағдай нашарлай бастады, тіпті АҚШ-та орташа өмір сүру ұзақтығы қысқаруда деген шошынышты деректер де белгілі болды.
Энн Кейс  және Ангус Дитонның өткен жылғы зерттеуінде айтылғандай, тұрғын халықтың үлкен сегменттерінде өмір сүру ұзақтығы қысқаруда, онын ішінде Американың Тот белдеуінің ашулы ерлері де бар.
Бірақ, табысы төмендердің 90%-ы ғасырдың үштен бірі бойы тоқырауда болған (және елеулі бөлігі төмендеп жатқан) жағдайда, денсаулық сақтау деректеріне жүгінсек, еліміздің өте үлкен бөлігінің жағдайы нашар.
Америка бұл үрдістің басында болғанымен, басқа жерлерде жағдай бұдан аса жақсы емес.
Саяси салдардың болуы анық көрінгенімен, олардың нысаны мен мерзімдері әлдеқайда айқын болмады.
Бұрын емес, ал дәл экономика түзетіліп келе жатқанда, АҚШ-та неге саяси қарсылық пайда болды?
Және неге ол оңға қарай бет алды?
Негізі, өздері қатты жақтаған  жаһандану нәтижесінде жұмыс орындарын жоғалтқан адамдарға ұсынылатын көмекті бұғаттаған республикашылдар болды. 26 штатта, медициналық көмекті кеңейтуге республиканшылдар қарсы болып, осылайша жағдайлары төмен адамдарға медициналық сақтандыру берілмеді.
Және басқаларды пайдалана отырып өмір сүрген, ашық түрде салықты төлемегенін мойындап және салықтан жалтаруды мақтаныш қылған біреу қалайша жеңіске жетті?
Дональд Трамп заман үрдісін дәл тапты: жағдай жақсы болмады, және көптеген сайлаушылар өзгерісті қалады.
Енді олардың тілегі орындалады- ешқандай іс әдеттегідей болмайды. Бірақ мұндай белгісіздік әлі болмаған.
Трамп қандай саясат жүргізетіні, олардың қайсысы табысқа жетеді немесе  олардың салдары қандай болады - мұның бәрі белгісіз болып тұр.
Трамп қалай болса да сауда соғысын жасайтындай.
Бірақ Қытай мен Мексика қандай жауап қайтарады?
Трамп өзінің ұсыныстары Дүниежүзілік сауда ұйымы ережесін бұзатынын түсінуі-ақ мүмкін, бірақ ол сондай-ақ, ДСҰ оған қарсы шығуы үшін ұзақ уақыт қажет екенін білетін шығар.
Ал ол уақытқа дейін, Американың сауда шоты қайта балансқа келуі мүмкін.
Бірақ бұл ойынды екі жақ та ойнай алады: Қытай, ұқсас әрекеттерді жасай алады, бірақ оның жауабы шеберлеу болуы мүмкін.
Бірақ сауда соғысы орын алса, қандай болар еді?
Трамптың жеңе аламын деп ойлауында негіз болуы мүмкін; өйткені, Қытай АҚШ-қа экспорт бойынша тәуелдірек болып табылады, бұл әрине АҚШ-қа артықшылық береді.
Бірақ сауда соғысы бір жақ қана жеңіп алатын ойын емес.
АҚШ та сондай-ақ жеңіледі. Қытай өткір саяси ауырсынуды тудыра отырып, кегін ала алады.
Қытайдың АҚШ-қа қарағанда, АҚШ-тың өздеріне зиян келтіруіне қарсы тұруында да артықшылығы бар.
Ауырсынуды кімнің оңайырақ шыдай алатынын бәріміз білеміз ғой.
Ол, қарапайым халқы қазірдің өзінде ұзақ зардап шеккен АҚШ па, немесе қиын-қыстау заманға қарамастан, 6% -дан асатын өсуді қалыптастыра білген Қытай ма?
Кеңінен алғанда, республикашылдар / Трамп күн тәртібі, стандартты GOP рецептінде көрсетілгендегіге қарағанда, салық қысқартуларымен бірге байларға қарай көбірек бағытталып, байлықтың төмен сарқылу идеясына негізделген, ол, шын мәнінде тиімді болмаған Рейган дәуірінің ұсыным экономикасының жалғасындай көрінеді.  Алау атқан риторика, немесе Twitter-де таңғы үште жазылған сандырақ ойлар, кем дегенде біраз уақытқа, Рейган революциясының салдарынан артты қалып кеткендердің ашуын басуы мүмкін.
Бірақ  бұл қаншалықты ұзақ уақытқа жетеді?
Ал содан соң не болады?
Трамп вуду экономикасының өз нұсқасын жүргізіп, экономиканың негізгі заңдарының күшін жоюды қалауы мүмкін.
Бірақ олай жасау мүмкін емес. Әлемнің ең ірі экономикасы 2017 жылы және одан әрі белгісіз саяси теңізге жол тартқанда, жәй бір пенде үшін болжам жасау ойсыз, аңғал қылықтай болар, тек айқын жәйттарды атау болмаса: су ағыны құбылмалы болады, және көптеген саясаттанушы кемелер батып та кетер.
9/11 and the New Authoritarianism
Five years after the attacks on the Twin Towers in New York and the Pentagon in Washington, “9/11” is no longer a mere date.
It has entered the history books as the beginning of something new, a new era perhaps, but in any case a time of change.
The terrorist bombings in Madrid and London and elsewhere will also be remembered; but it is “9/11” that has become the catchphrase, almost like “August 1914.”
But was it really a war that started on September 11, 2001?
Not all are happy about this American notion.
During the heyday of Irish terrorism in the UK, successive British governments went out of their way not to concede to the IRA the notion that a war was being waged.
“War” would have meant acceptance of the terrorists as legitimate enemies, in a sense as equals in a bloody contest for which there are accepted rules of engagement.
This is neither a correct description nor a useful terminology for terrorist acts, which are more correctly described as criminal.
By calling them war – and naming an opponent, usually al-Qaeda and its leader, Osama bin Laden – the United States government has justified domestic changes that, before the 9/11 attacks, would have been unacceptable in any free country.
Most of these changes were embodied in the so-called “USA Patriot Act.”
Though some of the changes simply involved administrative regulations, the Patriot Act’s overall effect was to erode the great pillars of liberty, such as habeas corpus , the right to recourse to an independent court whenever the state deprives an individual of his freedom.
From an early date, the prison camp at Guantánamo Bay in Cuba became the symbol of something unheard of: the arrest without trial of “illegal combatants” who are deprived of all human rights.
The world now wonders how many more of these non-human humans are there in how many places.
For everyone else, a kind of state of emergency was proclaimed that has allowed state interference in essential civil rights.
Controls at borders have become an ordeal for many, and police persecution now burdens quite a few.
A climate of fear has made life hard for anyone who looks suspicious or acts suspiciously, notably for Muslims.
Such restrictions on freedom did not meet with much public opposition when they were adopted.
On the contrary, by and large it was the critics, not the supporters, of these measures who found themselves in trouble.
In Britain, where Prime Minister Tony Blair supported the US attitude entirely, the government introduced similar measures and even offered a new theory.
Blair was the first to argue that security is the first freedom.
In other words, liberty is not the right of individuals to define their own lives, but the right of the state to restrict individual freedom in the name of a security that only the state can define.
This is the beginning of a new authoritarianism.
The problem exists in all countries affected by the threat of terrorism, though in many it has not become quite as specific.
In most countries of continental Europe, “9/11” has remained an American date.
There is even a debate – and indeed some evidence – concerning the question of whether involvement in the “war against terrorism” has actually increased the threat of terrorist acts.
Germans certainly use this argument to stay out of the action wherever possible.
This stance, however, has not prevented the spread of something for which a German word is used in other languages, too: Angst .
A diffuse anxiety is gaining ground.
People feel uneasy and worried, especially when traveling.
Any train accident or airplane crash is now at first suspected of being an act of terrorism.
Thus, 9/11 has meant, directly or indirectly, a great shock, both psychologically and to our political systems.
While terrorism is fought in the name of democracy, the fight has in fact led to a distinct weakening of democracy, owing to official legislation and popular angst.
One of the worrying features of the 9/11 attacks is that it is hard to see their purpose beyond the perpetrators’ resentment of the West and its ways.
But the West’s key features, democracy and the rule of law, have taken a far more severe battering at the hands of their defenders than by their attackers.
Two steps, above all, are needed to restore confidence in liberty within the democracies affected by the legacy of 9/11.
First, we must make certain that the relevant legislation to meet the challenge of terrorism is strictly temporary.
Some of today’s restrictions on habeas corpus and civil liberties have sunset clauses restricting their validity; all such rules should be re-examined by parliaments regularly.
Second, and more importantly, our leaders must seek to calm, rather than exploit, public anxiety.
The terrorists with whom we are currently at “war” cannot win, because their dark vision will never gain broad popular legitimacy.
That is all the more reason for democrats to stand tall in defending our values – first and foremost by acting in accordance with them.
9/11 in Perspective
NEW YORK – It was a decade ago that 19 terrorists took control of four planes, flew two into the twin towers of the World Trade Center, hit the Pentagon with a third, and crashed the fourth in a field in Pennsylvania after passengers resisted and made it impossible for the terrorists to complete their malevolent mission.
In a matter of hours, more than 3,000 innocent people, mostly Americans, but also people from 115 other countries, had their lives suddenly and violently taken from them.
September 11, 2001, was a terrible tragedy by any measure, but it was not a historical turning point.
It did not herald a new era of international relations in which terrorists with a global agenda prevailed, or in which such spectacular terrorist attacks became commonplace. On the contrary, 9/11 has not been replicated.
Despite the attention devoted to the “Global War on Terrorism,” the most important developments of the last ten years have been the introduction and spread of innovative information technologies, globalization, the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, and the political upheavals in the Middle East. 
As for the future, it is much more likely to be defined by the United States’ need to put its economic house in order; China’s trajectory within and beyond its borders; and the ability of the world’s governments to cooperate on restoring economic growth, stemming the spread of nuclear weapons, and meeting energy and environmental challenges.
It is and would be wrong to make opposition to terrorism the centerpiece of what responsible governments do in the world.
Terrorists continue to be outliers with limited appeal at best.
They can destroy but not create.
It is worth noting that the people who went into the streets of Cairo and Damascus calling for change were not shouting the slogans of Al Qaeda or supporting its agenda.
Moreover, measures have been implemented to push back, successfully, against terrorists.
Intelligence assets have been redirected. Borders have been made more secure and societies more resilient.
International cooperation has increased markedly, in part because governments that cannot agree on many things can agree on the need to cooperate in this area.
Military force has played a role as well.
Al Qaeda lost its base in Afghanistan when the Taliban government that had provided it sanctuary was ousted from power.
Osama bin-Laden was finally found and killed by US Special Forces in the suburbs of Islamabad.
Drones – unmanned aircraft that are remotely steered – have proven to be effective in killing a significant number of terrorists, including many of the most important leaders.
Weak governments can be made stronger; governments that tolerate or support terrorism must be held accountable.
But progress is not to be confused with victory.
Terrorists and terrorism cannot be eliminated any more than we can rid the world of disease.
There will always be those who will resort to force against innocent men, women, and children in pursuit of political goals.
Indeed, terrorists are advancing in some areas.
Pakistan remains a sanctuary for Al Qaeda and some of the world’s other most dangerous terrorists.
A mixture of instability, government weakness, and ideology in countries such as Yemen, Libya, Somalia, and Nigeria are providing fertile territory for terrorists to organize, train, and mount operations – much as they did in Afghanistan did a decade ago.
New groups constantly emerge from the ruins of old ones.
There is also a growing danger of homegrown terrorism.
We have seen it in Great Britain and the US.
The Internet, one of the great inventions of the modern Western world, has shown itself to be a weapon that can be used to incite and train those who wish to cause harm to that world.
The question raised in October 2003 by then US Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld is no less relevant today: “Are we capturing, killing, or deterring and dissuading more terrorists every day than the madrassas and the radical clerics are recruiting, training, and deploying against us?”
All things being equal, we probably are.
But even small terrorist successes are costly in terms of lives, money, and making open societies less so.
What is to be done?
Alas, there is no single or silver bullet.
The establishment of a Palestinian state will not be enough for those terrorists who want to see the elimination of the Jewish state, any more than reaching a compromise over Kashmir will satisfy those Pakistan-based terrorists with bigger agendas vis-à-vis India.
Reducing unemployment is desirable, of course, but many terrorists do not come from poverty.
Helping to make societies in the Middle East and elsewhere more democratic might reduce the alienation that can lead to radicalism and worse, but this is easier said than done.
Of course, we want to continue to find ways to make ourselves less vulnerable and terrorists more so.
But what may be most important, particularly in the Arab and Islamic communities, is to end any acceptance of terrorism.
The Nigerian father who warned the US embassy in Lagos that he feared what his own son might do – before that same young man attempted to detonate a bomb aboard a flight to Detroit on Christmas Day 2009 – is an example of just this.
Only when more parents, teachers, and community leaders behave likewise will recruitment of terrorists dry up and law-enforcement authorities receive full cooperation from the populations they police.
Terrorism must lose its legitimacy among those who have historically supported or tolerated it before it will lose its potency.
Transatlantic Trade for All
WASHINGTON, DC – The negotiations to create a Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership between the European Union and the United States are being widely welcomed.
British Prime Minister David Cameron has called the TTIP a “once-in-a-generation prize,” citing potential gains of £80 billion ($125.5 billion) each for the EU and the US and £85 billion for the rest of the world.
For a world weary of waiting for the World Trade Organization’s interminable Doha trade round to conclude, even a bilateral trade initiative may seem like a boon, especially when, as a recent Financial Times editorial pointed out, “bilateral” covers half of the world’s economy.
But there is a serious downside: The deal could hurt developing-country exporters, unless the EU and the US make a concerted effort to protect these actors’ interests.
The feature of the proposed pact that elicits the most excitement – its focus on regulatory barriers like mandatory product standards – should actually incite the greatest concern.
Given low tariffs in the EU and the US – less than 5%, on average – further preferential reductions will not seriously handicap outsiders.
But, when it comes to standards – such as those governing safety, health, and the environment – the market-access requirements are brutal and binary: either you meet the established standard or you do not sell.
As a result, third-country firms’ options will depend on how TTIP standards are established: through harmonization (adoption of a common standard) or mutual recognition (acceptance of goods that meet one another’s established standards).
The first option would enable producers everywhere to take advantage of economies of scale.
But, in some cases, the harmonized standard could be more stringent than some countries’ original standards.
Even though new standards would apply to suppliers from all exporting countries, compliance costs usually vary, meaning that those less equipped to meet higher standards could suffer.
In the late 1990’s, when the EU decided to harmonize standards for aflatoxins (a group of toxic compounds produced by certain molds), eight member states – including Italy, the Netherlands, and Spain – raised their national standards substantially, which is likely to have caused African exports of cereals, dried fruits, and nuts to Europe to decline by as much as $670 million.
With mutual recognition, the EU and the US would accept each other’s standards or conformity-assessment procedures, allowing firms to adhere to the less stringent requirements in each area.
If the policy were extended to third-country firms, it would have a powerful liberalizing impact.
For example, Malaysian television producers could choose to comply with, say, America’s easier-to-meet safety standards, then sell the same product in both markets, reaping the benefits of economies of scale while lowering compliance costs.
If, however, the TTIP excluded third-country firms from the mutual recognition policy, their competitiveness vis-à-vis European and American companies would diminish substantially.
Indeed, our research shows that when mutual-recognition agreements include restrictive rules of origin, intra-regional trade increases – at the expense of trade with other countries – and that developing countries tend to suffer most.
In fact, excessively constraining rules of origin have proved problematic for some of the EU’s previous recognition agreements, such as those governing professional-services standards.
While a Brazilian orange admitted for sale in Portugal can be sold throughout the EU, a Brazilian engineer or accountant licensed in Portugal must fulfill separate licensing requirements to work elsewhere in the EU, hampering much-needed labor mobility by forcing non-European workers to endure costly and inefficient bureaucratic procedures.
Furthermore, when it comes to tariffs and standards, WTO rules are not created equal.
While they protect countries excluded from bilateral or regional tariff agreements, thereby ensuring that integrated markets do not receive additional advantages, few safeguards exist to shield third countries from the fallout of agreements on mandatory standards.
Even in the absence of international rules, the EU and the US could take two actions to ensure that the TTIP does not have adverse consequences for developing economies.
First, they could allow all countries to reap the benefits of a bilateral mutual-recognition deal by agreeing not to impose restrictive rules of origin.
Second, where they do consider harmonization, they could favor the less stringent of the original standards, unless there is credible evidence that it would not support the relevant regulatory objective.
This is akin to a WTO test for departures from established international standards.
If the EU and the US made these two commitments, the rest of the world could follow the TTIP negotiations with hope, rather than trepidation.
A Balanced Look at Sino-American Imbalances
BEIJING – Before July 2007, most economists agreed that global imbalances were the most important threat to global growth.
It was argued that the United States’ rising net foreign debt-to-GDP ratio – the result of chronic current-account deficits – would put a sharp brake on capital inflows, in turn weakening the dollar, driving up interest rates, and plunging the US economy into crisis.
But this scenario failed to materialize. Instead, the crisis stemmed from the US sub-prime debacle, which quickly dragged the global economy into its deepest recession since the 1930’s.
Most economists failed to foresee the economic dynamics that actually led to the crisis, because they failed to pay enough attention to the rapid increase in US total debt.
Instead, they focused exclusively on US foreign debt, ignoring household debt (mortgage and consumer debt), public debt, business debt, and financial debt.
In particular, they should have paid greater attention to the sustainability of US mortgage and consumer debt.
In 2007, the mortgage and consumer debt-to-GDP ratio was more than 90%, compared to 24% for net foreign debt.
Of course, the various components of debt differ considerably in their character and sources of financing – and thus in their sustainability.
But all parts of a country’s total debt and how it is financed are interconnected.
This means two things. First, funds from different sources of finance are interchangeable to a certain degree: deficiency of funds for one component of total debt can be supplemented by surplus funds originally aimed at financing other components.
Second, troubles in any single component of total debt will have an impact on all the other components.
After the subprime crisis erupted, mortgage and consumer debt was paid down by households either with their savings or by default.
The fall in US total debt, and the narrowing of the financing gap between total debt and domestic funds, led to a significant improvement in the US current-account deficit in 2008-2009, disproving US Federal Reserve Board Chairman Ben Bernanke’s claim that the deficit was caused by a global “saving glut.”
Indeed, America’s current-account position strengthened despite the dollar’s appreciation in the face of safe-haven demand.
Unfortunately, as a result of the private-sector deleveraging and an increase in household savings, the US economy, driven by debt and consumption, slid into recession.
To offset the negative impact of private-sector deleveraging on growth, the US government has maintained expansionary fiscal and monetary policies.
Now, with household debt sustained on a knife-edge after feverish government intervention, the fiscal position has deteriorated dramatically and the current-account balance has worsened again.
Sustainability of public debt has replaced sustainability of private debt as the biggest threat to financial stability, and the focus of debate about the US current account has shifted from the sustainability of foreign debt to the impact of reducing the external deficit on growth and employment.
The dilemma facing US policymakers is how to stimulate growth while lowering the level of total debt.
The most important way to achieve both objectives is to increase exports by strengthening US competitiveness.
But where will increased competitiveness come from?
Devaluation of the dollar could improve US competitiveness in the short run, but it is not a solution.
Because rapid fiscal deterioration now has investors worrying about capital losses on US government securities, devaluation would make foreigners more hesitant to finance America’s budget deficit.
If foreign financing is not forthcoming, yields on US government debt will rise and the US economy will fall back into recession.
In the long run, America’s growth pattern must undergo a structural shift from reliance on debt and consumption one based on Americans vaunted capacity for creativity and innovation.
Only then will America improve its competitiveness enough to allow the government to reduce both private and public debt to sustainable levels while maintaining a respectable growth rate.
But neither improved competitiveness, nor reduction of total debt, can be achieved overnight.
In the short run, the US current-account deficit will remain, regardless of which country runs bilateral surpluses.
Thus, China’s continued reinvestment of its current-account surplus in US government securities is of utmost important for US growth and financial stability.
Given that America benefits mightily from China’s purchases of US government securities, it is difficult to understand why the US government and Congress have been complaining so much about the bilateral current-account deficit.
It is also difficult to grasp why China is so reluctant to reduce its bilateral surplus, given meager returns on its massive holdings of US government securities and a sustained risk of large capital losses in the future.
The good news is that, following President Hu Jintao’s recent visit to Washington, both America and China have been taking positive steps to resolve their differences over the bilateral current-account balance.
That augurs well for a more rational and constructive Sino-American dialogue on global imbalances, which would certainly benefit the global economy.
A Banking Union Baby Step
BRUSSELS – At the beginning of the financial crisis, it was said that banks were, in Charles Goodhart’s crisp phrase, “international in life, but national in death.”
At the time (2008-2009), large international banks had to be rescued by their home countries’ governments when they ran into trouble.
But the problem now in Europe is the opposite: banks are “national in life, but European in death.”
In Spain, for example, local savings banks (cajas) financed an outsize real-estate boom.
As the boom turned to bust, the losses threatened to overwhelm the capacity of the Spanish state, and the problem became European, because it threatened the very survival of the euro.
The Spanish case is symptomatic of a larger problem.
National supervisors always tend to minimize problems at home.
Their instinct (and their bureaucratic interest) is to defend their countries’ “national champion” bank(s) abroad.
But their resistance to recognizing problems at home runs even deeper.
Until recently, the Spanish authorities maintained that the problems in their country’s real-estate sector were temporary.
To acknowledge the truth would have meant admitting that for years they had overlooked the build-up of an unsustainable construction boom that now threatens to bankrupt the entire country.
In the case of Ireland, the situation was initially not much different.
When problems started to surface, the finance minister at the time initially claimed that the country would carry out “the cheapest bank rescue ever.”
Given national supervisors’ predictable tendency not to recognize problems at home, it seemed natural that the cost of cleaning up insolvent banks should also be borne at the national level.
It thus seemed to make sense that even in the eurozone, banking supervision remained largely national.
The recently created European Banking Authority has only limited powers over national supervisors, whose daily work is guided mainly by national considerations.
But reality has shown that this approach is not tenable.
Problems might originate at the national level, but, owing to monetary union, they quickly threaten the stability of the entire eurozone banking system.
At their June summit, Europe’s leaders finally recognized the need to rectify this situation, transferring responsibility for banking supervision in the eurozone to the European Central Bank.
Given that financial integration is particularly strong within the monetary union, putting the ECB in charge was an obvious choice.
Moreover, the ECB already bears de facto responsibility for the stability of the eurozone’s banking system.
But, until now, it had to lend massive amounts to banks without being able to judge their soundness, because all of that information was in the hands of national authorities who guarded it jealously and typically denied problems until it was too late.
Putting the ECB in charge should also help to stop the creeping disintegration process, which is not publicly visible, but is very real nonetheless.
Just ask any of the large international banking groups headquartered in financially stressed eurozone countries.
Consider the case of a bank headquartered in Italy, but with an important subsidiary in Germany.
The German operations naturally generate a surplus of funds (given that savings in Germany far exceed investment on average).
The parent bank would like to use these funds to reinforce the group’s liquidity.
But the German supervisory authorities consider Italy at risk and thus oppose any transfer of funds there.
The supervisor of the home country (Italy) has the opposite interest.
It would like to see the “internal capital market” operate as much as possible.
Here, too, it makes sense to have the ECB in charge as a neutral arbiter with respect to these opposing interests.
But, while putting the ECB in charge of banking supervision solves one problem, it creates another: can national authorities still be held responsible for saving banks that they no longer supervise?
Economic (and political) logic requires that the eurozone will soon also need a common bank rescue fund.
Officially, this has not yet been acknowledged.
But that is often the way that European integration proceeds: an incomplete step in one area later requires further steps in related areas.
This incremental approach has worked well in the past; indeed, today’s European Union resulted from it.
But a financial crisis does not give policymakers the time that they once had to explain to voters why one step required another.
They will have to walk much more quickly to save the euro.
The Renewed Promise of Abenomics
TOKYO – Japan’s Liberal Democratic Party scored a decisive victory in the December 14 parliamentary election, with Japanese voters demonstrating their overwhelming approval of Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s macroeconomic policy agenda.
Though voter turnout was relatively low, owing largely to the somewhat technical nature of the issues, the election’s message was clear: most Japanese abhor the prospect of a return to the grim economic trajectory that prevailed in Japan before “Abenomics.”
When the first “arrow” of Abenomics – a fiscal stimulus program – was launched nearly two years ago, asset markets' immediate response was positive.
The second arrow of Abenomics – monetary easing – intensified these effects.
In the last two years, Japan’s stock market has almost doubled in value, increasing the wealth of Japanese consumers.
Moreover, the yen has fallen by nearly one-third against the US dollar, from around ¥80 to nearly ¥120 per dollar, invigorating Japan’s export industries.
Even more encouraging are developments in the labor market, which, unlike those in asset markets, reflect outcomes, not expectations.
Here, too, the news is good.
The labor market has tightened, with unemployment standing at 3.5% and the job-to-applicant ratio above parity.
To be sure, there have been some setbacks: Japan’s GDP shrank in the second and third quarters of 2014.
But the downturn, which resulted from April’s consumption-tax hike – from 5% to 8% – cannot be blamed on Abenomics.
Indeed, Abe was honoring a law enacted by the previous government, led by the Democratic Party of Japan.
The first two arrows of Abenomics were aimed at stimulating demand – and they were extremely effective.
The consumption-tax hike was needed to sustain them in flight. Unfortunately, the hike was too large to keep them aloft.
The good news is that the tax hike’s impact is temporary. Soon, it will begin to taper off, and industrial output will approach full capacity.
When demand begins to exceed supply, demand-side stimulus policies will become increasingly ineffective, and it will be time to launch the third arrow of Abenomics: growth-enhancing structural reforms.
Such reforms are essential to raise productivity growth and improve the Japanese economy’s competitiveness.
Four imperatives stand out.
The first task should be to eliminate – or, at least, reduce – the thicket of government regulations that is stifling economic dynamism.
The current system is so convoluted and complex that it took more than three decades to open a new medical school in Tokyo.
Likewise, flights to Haneda airport, a convenient connection to the Tokyo city area, have been rationed.
This is no formula for long-term economic success.
Furthermore, Japan’s government should push to complete negotiations for the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which is currently being negotiated among 12 countries, from Mexico to the United States to Vietnam.
The TPP would improve Japan’s trade prospects considerably, including in sensitive sectors like agriculture, where exports of fast-moving consumer goods like flowers and vegetables would benefit.
Japan’s leaders must also work to expand the workforce, which faces severe constraints, owing largely to the country’s rapidly aging population.
In the absence of large-scale immigration, to which Japanese remain unamenable, one relatively simple solution would be to integrate more women into the labor force.
A 10% increase in Japan’s female labor-force participation rate – an entirely attainable goal – would translate into an almost 5% gain in total labor-force participation.
Finally, Abe’s government must reduce the corporate-tax rate to align it more closely with international standards.
Amid increasingly intense international competition to attract foreign investment, reducing the corporate tax would actually increase Japan’s tax revenues, by spurring companies to invest their vast cash stockpiles in more productive activities.
Now that Abe’s government has a renewed mandate from Japanese voters, it must deliver on its promises – and that means decisive and comprehensive implementation of structural reforms.
Of course, this will require some sacrifices.
Indeed, households have already endured some hardship, brought about by the consumption-tax hike.
The next step is for Abe’s government to use its political capital to overcome vested interests, both in the bureaucracy and the business community.
This means compelling businesses to give up some of the special tax benefits they now enjoy.
For their part, politicians must participate in the taxpayer identification system.
And bureaucrats must forego some of the power that excessive regulation affords them.
If all of these groups join the Japanese public in accepting reasonable sacrifices, Abe’s government can fulfill its promise and build a thriving economy.
For the sake of all Japanese – not to mention a world economy in need of a new source of dynamism – that promise deserves to be met.
The Missing Arrow of Abenomics
TOKYO – In his drive to kick-start the Japanese economy, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, shortly after taking office in 2012, introduced a large fiscal stimulus and put in place a bold program of monetary easing.
Since then, Japanese policymakers have been working to launch what Abe calls the third “arrow” of his agenda: arduous reforms of key industries and the demolition of structural barriers to growth.
But the focus on public policy has left a “fourth arrow” – the private sector – untouched and seemingly ignored.
This is unfortunate, because the government cannot fix Japan’s ills on its own.
Annual productivity growth has been stubbornly sluggish, rarely rising above 2% for much of the past two decades, reflecting both missed opportunities and declining cost competitiveness.
Japan’s productivity slump permeates the entire economy; labor and capital productivity gains have nearly stalled in almost every sector – even in Japan’s signature advanced manufacturing industries.
Labor productivity in the transport-equipment sector, for example, is barely half that of Germany.
This trend puts annual GDP growth on course to average only 1.3% through 2025, implying a third consecutive decade of stagnation.
Such an outcome would coincide with – and exacerbate the effects of – an adverse demographic shift that will constrain fiscal revenues and drive up costs for universal health care and pension benefits.
Japan’s ability to alter its trajectory depends on individual companies making decisions to invest, change workplace policies, deploy new technologies, and test untried business models.
Abe’s structural reforms will take time and political will to enact, but Japanese companies cannot afford to sit still.
They can and must act, without waiting for the government to change its policies.
In many cases, the economy’s bottlenecks are not regulatory in nature, but stem from entrenched ways of doing business.
New research by the McKinsey Global Institute examines Japan’s advanced manufacturing, retail, financial services, and health-care industries in detail – and finds substantial untapped productivity potential in every area.
For starters, Japanese firms must become more globally integrated.
Exporting to the fastest-growing overseas markets is one obvious route to overcoming sluggish demand growth at home.
But, rather than just selling products abroad, Japanese enterprises need to expand operations beyond their borders and cast a wider net for international talent.
Japanese companies have formidable R&amp;D operations, but most will need to reconfigure them to obtain better returns and impact.
The process must start with an understanding of what the customer wants and a determination to deliver solutions accordingly.
Closed and tightly managed R&amp;D operations must be transformed into more fluid, open processes involving collaboration with customers and suppliers.
Japanese companies will also need to improve their capabilities in areas such as marketing, pricing, and talent development.
While there are some pockets of excellence, most Japanese firms are severely lacking in these areas.
To compete in global markets, they will need to achieve the same consistency in these areas that they have in their traditional areas of strength.
Many Japanese companies have yet to digitize paper-based processes and replace outdated information-technology systems.
Others would benefit from moving beyond basic digitization to next-generation technologies, such as big-data analytics.
Companies can also head off looming labor shortages with intelligent software systems and robotics.
Manufacturers can augment or replace their assembly lines with technologies such as the Internet of Things and 3D printing.
More broadly, Japanese companies have to organize for performance and discipline.
As policy changes unleash market forces, businesses will face greater competition.
Some may need to reorganize or exit unprofitable markets; others may have to undertake mergers and acquisitions to achieve economies of scale.
Finally, shareholders and senior executives should tie performance goals to incentives.
Some of Japan’s corporate giants have already begun shifting from traditional seniority-based advancement toward merit-based pay structures.
Others should follow their lead.
Promoting younger and more diverse talent can create agile organizations with fresh ideas.
If Japan’s private sector rises to the challenge, it can move the economy onto a path of faster growth.
Innovations in one company would cascade across its entire industry by forcing competitors to raise their game.
In the 1950s and 1960s, for example, Toyota introduced more efficient production processes that were eventually adopted by the entire automobile industry.
Instead of settling for a future of 1.3% annual GDP growth, Japan could attain roughly 3% annual growth through 2025.
Doing so would require the growth rate of labor productivity to more than double, but this is an attainable goal.
More than half of this growth increment can be met by adopting best practices that companies around the world already use, while technology can close much of the remaining gap.
Japanese business leaders need to combine big thinking with a focused attention to detail.
They will need to create innovative products, penetrate new markets, and make bold investments in equipment, technology, and talent, while simultaneously scrutinizing every aspect of their operations for inefficiency and waste.
Traditional ways of doing business may have to be abandoned.
But there is ample scope to make progress and spur faster economic growth.
Immense trade flows, the rise of billions of new consumers in the emerging world, and technology breakthroughs are rapidly transforming the global economy.
Japan can shift its current trajectory by turning this wave of disruption into opportunity.
From Russia With Unrequited Love
NEW DELHI – Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has assiduously courted Russian President Vladimir Putin, meeting with him more than a dozen times in four years.
This month he hosted Putin in Tokyo and in his hometown of Nagato (famed for its onsen, or natural hot springs).
But Abe’s courtship has so far yielded little for Japan, and much for Russia.
Abe’s diplomatic overtures to Putin are integral to his broader strategy to position Japan as a counterweight to China, and to rebalance power in Asia, where Japan, Russia, China, and India form a strategic quadrangle.
Abe has already built a close relationship with India, and he sees improved relations with Russia – with which Japan never formally made peace after World War II – as the missing ingredient for a regional power equilibrium.
But Abe’s trust-building efforts with Russia are not aimed only at checking Chinese aggression.
He also wants Russia to return its southernmost Kuril Islands – a resource-rich area known as the Northern Territories in Japan – which the Soviet Union seized just after the United States dropped nuclear bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 1945.
In exchange, Abe has offered economic aid, investments in Russia’s neglected Far East, and major energy deals.
Abe has, however, encountered several obstacles.
For starters, Japan is a participant in the US-led sanctions that were imposed on Russia after it annexed Crimea in March 2014.
These sanctions have pushed Russia closer to its traditional rival, China; and Putin has publicly identified the sanctions as a hindrance to concluding a peace treaty with Japan.
In response to Abe’s overtures, Putin has doggedly tried to drive a hard bargain.
Against this backdrop, it is not surprising that Abe left the recent “onsen summit” with dashed hopes of resolving the territorial dispute, while Putin returned home with 68 new commercial accords.
Many of the new agreements are symbolic, but some are substantive, including deals worth $2.5 billion and an agreement to set up a $1 billion bilateral-investment fund.
Under the latter agreement, Japan and Russia are supposed create a “special framework” for joint economic activities on the disputed islands.
But the plan has already run into trouble.
Peter Shelakhaev, a senior Russian official who leads the government’s Far East Investment and Export Agency, has indicated that there are legal hurdles to establishing such a framework, and that Japanese firms doing business on the Kurils would have to pay taxes to Russia.
If Japan did that, however, it would effectively be recognizing Russia’s jurisdiction over the islands.
Abe has thus been denied the legacy that he sought, while Putin has succeeded in easing Russia’s international isolation.
Abe was the first G7 leader to hold a summit with Putin after Russia annexed Crimea, and now Russia has won Japan’s economic cooperation, too.
Japan is the only G7 country that has a territorial dispute with Russia, and it is clearly more eager to reach a deal than the Kremlin is.
But this has only strengthened Russia’s hand.
While Japan has softened its position, and signaled that it may accept only a partial return of the islands, Russia has grown only more intransigent.
After the recent summit, Abe revealed that Putin now seems to be reneging on a 1956 agreement between Japan and the Soviet Union, which stipulates that the smaller two of the four islands will be returned to Japan after a peace treaty is signed.
As it happens, this year marks the 60th anniversary of that joint declaration, which was widely viewed as a breakthrough at the time.
The Kremlin is now suggesting that its commitment to fulfilling the declaration was conditional on Japan not joining any security alliance against Russia.
And Putin has expressed concerns that the 1960 Japan-US Security Treaty would extend to the disputed islands if they were returned, thus allowing the US to establish a military presence there.
Japan is in no position to address Russia’s concerns.
It cannot opt out of the US-led sanctions regime; and it cannot exempt the disputed Kurils from its security treaty with the US, especially now that it has been urging the US to provide an explicit commitment to defend the Japanese-controlled Senkaku Islands, over which China claims sovereignty.
Putin, for his part, appears smugly content with his negotiating position.
Not only did he arrive almost three hours late to the onsen summit, in keeping with his habit of leaving foreign leaders waiting; he also declined a Japanese government gift – a male companion for his native Japanese Akita dog, which Japan gave him in 2012.
There is little hope now that Abe will see tangible returns on the political capital he has invested in cultivating Putin.
And Japan’s dilemma will only deepen.
US President-elect Donald Trump’s desire to improve relations with Russia may give Abe leeway to continue wooing Putin; but if Russia gets the US in its corner, it won’t need Japan anymore.
A Berlin Consensus?
HONG KONG – A recent trip to Berlin brought back memories of an earlier visit in the summer of 1967, when I was a poor student who marveled at the Wall that would divide and devastate an entire society for another two decades.
Berlin today is vibrant and rejuvenated, rebuilt by the German peoples' hard work and sacrifice to unify the country, and an apt setting for the conference of the Institute for New Economic Thinking (INET), which I was there to attend.
The conference’s theme was “Paradigm Lost,” with more than 300 economists, political scientists, systems analysts, and ecologists gathering to rethink economic and political theory for the challenges and uncertainty posed by growing inequality, rising unemployment, global financial disarray, and climate change.
Almost everyone agreed that the old paradigm of neoclassical economics was broken, but there was no agreement on what can replace it.
Nobel laureate Amartya Sen attributed the European crisis to four failures – political, economic, social, and intellectual.
The global financial crisis, which began in 2007 as a crisis of US subprime lending and has broadened into a European sovereign-debt (and banking) crisis, has raised questions that we cannot answer, owing to over-specialization and fragmentation of knowledge.
And yet there is no denying that the world has become too intricate for any simple, overarching theory to explain complex economic, technological, demographic, and environmental shifts.
In particular, the rise of emerging markets has challenged traditional Western deductive and inductive logic.
Deductive inference enables us to predict effects if we know the principles (the rule) and the cause.
By inductive reasoning, if we know the cause and effects, we can infer the principles.
Eastern thinking, by contrast, has been abductive, moving from pragmatism to guessing the next steps.
Abductive inference is pragmatic, looking only at outcomes, guessing at the rule, and identifying the cause.
Like history, social-scientific theory is written by the victors and shaped by the context and challenges of its time.
Free-market thinking evolved from Anglo-Saxon theorists (many from Scotland), who migrated and colonized territories, allowing fortunate individuals to assume that there were no limits to consumption.
European continental thinking, responding to urbanization and the need for social order, emphasized institutional analysis of political economy.
Thus, the emergence of neoclassical economics in the nineteenth century was very much influenced by Newtonian and Cartesian physics, moving from qualitative analysis to quantifying human behavior by assuming rational behavior and excluding uncertainty.
This “predetermined equilibrium” thinking – reflected in the view that markets always self-correct – led to policy paralysis until the Great Depression, when John Maynard Keynes’s argument for government intervention to address unemployment and output gaps gained traction.
By the 1970’s, the neoclassical general-equilibrium school captured Keynesian economics through real-sector models that assumed that “finance is a veil,” thereby becoming blind to financial markets’ destabilizing effects.
Economists like Hyman Minsky, who tried to correct this, were largely ignored as Milton Friedman and others led the profession’s push for free markets and minimal government intervention.
But then technology, demographics, and globalization brought dramatic new challenges that the neoclassical approach could not foresee.
Even as the world’s advanced countries over-consumed through leveraging from derivative finance, four billion of the world’s seven billion people began moving to middle-income status, making huge demands on global resources and raising the issue of ecological sustainability.
New thinking is required to manage these massive and systemic changes, as well as the integration of giants like China and India into the modern world.
A change of mindset is needed not just in the West, but also in the East.
In 1987, the historian Ray Huang explained it for China:
“As the world enters the modern era, most countries under internal and external pressure need to reconstruct themselves by substituting the mode of governance rooted in agrarian experience with a new set of rules based on commerce.…This is easier said than done.
The renewal process could affect the top and bottom layers, and inevitably it is necessary to recondition the institutional links between them.
Comprehensive destruction is often the order; and it may take decades to bring the work to completion.”
Using this macro-historical framework, we can see Japanese deflation, European debt, and even the Arab Spring as phases of systemic changes within complex structures that are interacting with one another in a new, multipolar global system.
We are witnessing simultaneous global convergence (the narrowing of income, wealth, and knowledge gaps between countries) and local divergence (widening income, wealth, and knowledge gaps within countries).
Adaptive systems struggle with order and creativity as they evolve.
As the philosopher Bertrand Russell presciently put it: “Security and justice require centralized governmental control, which must extend to the creation of a world government if it is to be effective.
Progress, on the contrary, requires the utmost scope for personal initiative that is compatible with social order.”
A new wave of what the economist Joseph Schumpeter famously called “creative destruction” is under way: even as central banks struggle to maintain stability by flooding markets with liquidity, credit to business and households is shrinking.
We live in an age of simultaneous fear of inflation and deflation; of unprecedented prosperity amid growing inequality; and of technological advancement and resource depletion.
Meanwhile, existing political systems promise good jobs, sound governance, a sustainable environment, and social harmony without sacrifice – a paradise of self-interested free riders that can be sustained only by sacrificing the natural environment and the welfare of future generations.
We cannot postpone the pain of adjustment forever by printing money.
Sustainability can be achieved only when the haves become willing to sacrifice for the have-nots.
The Washington Consensus of free-market reforms for developing countries ended more than two decades ago.
The INET conference in Berlin showed the need for a new one – a consensus that supports sacrifice in the interest of unity.
Europe could use it.
Accepting Japan at Its Word
TOKYO – In recent years, the number of tourists visiting Japan has been increasing rapidly, reaching a record 13.4 million last year, a 29% increase from 2013.
Japan seems to be making great strides toward its goal of recapturing the position as an Asian cultural center that it held a century ago, when the Indian Nobel laureate poet Rabindranath Tagore lived in Tokyo.
Chinese revolutionary leaders Sun Yat-sen and Chiang Kai-shek, along with many other prominent Asians, moved there as well.
Anyone visiting Japan today would do well to learn two key words: domo, meaning “hello,” “thanks,” or “well,” and sumimasen, which can carry any of the meanings of domo, as well as “sorry” or “excuse me.”
Ordinary Japanese say sumimasen countless times each day, to apologize to friends or strangers for even the most trivial accident or mistake.
But, as Japan’s leaders have experienced firsthand since World War II, expressing regret to other countries is not so simple.
Yet that is precisely what Prime Minister Shinzo Abe must do in his upcoming statement marking the 70th anniversary of the end of the war.
The statement will be based on consultations with many of Japan’s, and the world’s, leading WWII historians, as well as – and more important – with himself, his conscience, and his heart, because he understands the significance of his words on this highly fraught topic.
Of course, Abe is far from the first Japanese leader to confront this challenge.
His statement will follow a long line of declarations by prime ministers and chief cabinet secretaries expressing sincere remorse over the events of WWII.
Twenty years ago, Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama, the head of the Socialist Party, acknowledged that “Japan, through its colonial rule and aggression, caused tremendous damage and suffering to the people of many countries,” particularly in Asia.
He went on to express “feelings of deep remorse” and offer a “heartfelt apology” to the victims.
Ten years later, Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi reiterated Murayama’s words, adding that since the war, Japan had been “manifesting its remorse for the war through actions,” especially development assistance and humanitarian activities.
Koizumi also pledged that “Japan, as a peace-loving nation, will work to achieve peace and prosperity for all humankind with all its resources.”
Despite these straightforward declarations of regret, some governments and citizens continue to demand more, giving the impression that nothing a Japanese leader says or does will convince them of the country’s remorse.
This intractability is, in some cases, understandable; the pain of survivors and their descendants remains acute.
But in many other cases, the unwillingness to move beyond history is driven by political interests.
Indeed, political motivations are behind claims that Abe does not agree with past official apologies, despite his repeated assurances that he does, as well as suggestions that he is seeking to revise history, even though he has never denied Japan’s colonial aggression.
Moreover, some have produced portrayals of Japan, as a whole, as an unrepentant country – or, worse, as one that is hell-bent on remilitarization.
Such depictions are breathtaking in their audacity, given Japan’s seven-decade record as a peaceful and constructive member of the international community.
This is not lost on those in Japan who ask for how long their country will have to apologize, with some even suggesting that after 70 years, a “tweet” on the subject should amount to adequate acknowledgement by Abe.
The prime minister, however, remains committed to issuing a strong and sincere statement on the subject.
Early this year, Abe announced his intention to use the 70th anniversary statement to communicate Japan’s remorse for the war, describe the progress the country has made in upholding peace, and describe the contributions that Japan can make to Asia and the rest of the world in the coming decades.
In fact, it is the third component of the announcement that inspires fear in some observers: By helping to build a strong security architecture in the Asia-Pacific region, Japan could undermine the ability of some actors to advance their own interests.
That is why they launched a whisper campaign against Abe’s statement months before he even began to write it.
But, of course, Asian security and prosperity is in everyone’s interest.
Given this, not even the language of Abe’s statement is particularly important; what matters is the determination he expresses, and the actions he takes to follow through – with appropriate humility – on his pledges.
And it seems that Abe is, indeed, determined to make real contributions to peace, based on effective cooperation with Japan’s friends and allies.
But if Asia is to move beyond its past, the victims of Japan’s wartime aggression must recognize that the Japan of 2015 is not the Japan of 1931, 1941, or even 1945, and that, as many Asian leaders have realized over the years, forgiveness benefits everyone.
In 1998, South Korean President Kim Dae-jung responded positively to a statement by former Japanese Prime Minister Keizo Obuchi.
The governments of Indonesia, the Philippines, Vietnam, and other countries have done the same, and now welcome Japan’s commitment to act with its allies to protect regional security.
These countries’ openness to reconciliation have enabled Japan to recast itself as a key arbiter of regional peace and prosperity, not to mention an increasingly dynamic cultural hub.
It is time for the rest of the region to follow suit, accepting at face value Japan’s sincere apologies and working with the country to build a better future.
At a time when Asia is facing serious security challenges, this stance could not be more urgent.
A Big Chance for Small Farmers
NEW YORK – The G-8’s $20 billion initiative on smallholder agriculture, launched at the group’s recent summit in L’Aquila, Italy, is a potentially historic breakthrough in the fight against hunger and extreme poverty.
With serious management of the new funds, food production in Africa will soar.
Indeed, the new initiative, combined with others in health, education, and infrastructure, could be the greatest step so far toward achieving the Millennium Development Goals, the internationally agreed effort to reduce extreme poverty, disease, and hunger by half by 2015 .
During 2002-2006, I led the United Nations Millennium Project, which aimed to achieve the Millennium Development Goals, for then-UN Secretary General Kofi Annan.
One cornerstone of the project was “smallholder farmers,” meaning peasant farm families in Africa, Latin America, and Asia – working farms of around one hectare (2.5 acres) or less.
These are some of the poorest households in the world, and, ironically, some of the hungriest as well, despite being food producers.
They are hungry because they lack the ability to buy high-yield seeds, fertilizer, irrigation equipment, and other tools needed to increase productivity.
As a result, their output is meager and insufficient for their subsistence.
Their poverty causes low farm productivity, and low farm productivity reinforces their poverty.
It’s a vicious circle, technically known as a poverty trap.
The UN Millennium Project’s Hunger Task Force, led by two world-leading scientists, M. S. Swaminathan and Pedro Sanchez, examined how to break this vicious circle.
The Hunger Task Force determined that Africa could substantially increase its food production if help was given to smallholder farmers, in the form of agricultural inputs.  The Millennium Project recommended a big increase in global funding for this purpose.  Drawing on that work and related scientific findings, Annan launched a call in 2004 for an African Green Revolution, based on an expanded partnership between Africa and donor countries.
Many of us, notably current UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon, have worked hard to make this possible, with Ban repeatedly emphasizing the special emergency arising from the global food, financial, and energy crises of the past two years.
The G-8 announcement reflects these years of effort, and of course the boost from the leadership of US President Barack Obama, Spanish Prime Minister Jose Luis Zapatero, Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, World Bank President Robert Zoellick, European Commissioner Louis Michel, European Parliamentarian Thijs Berman, and others.
Now the key is to make this effort work.
The lessons of history are clear.
Getting seed and fertilizer to smallholder farmers at highly subsidized prices (or even free in some cases) will make a lasting difference.
Not only will food yields rise in the short term, but farm households will use their higher incomes and better health to accumulate all sorts of assets: cash balances, soil nutrients, farm animals, and their children’s health and education.
That boost in assets will, in turn, enable local credit markets, such as micro-finance, to begin operating.
Farmers will be able to buy inputs, either out of their own cash, or by borrowing against their improved creditworthiness.
A consensus has now been reached on the need to assist smallholders, but obstacles remain.
Perhaps the main risk is that the “aid bureaucracies” now trip over each other to try to get their hands on the $20 billion, so that much of it gets taken up by meetings, expert consultations, overhead, reports, and further meetings.
“Partnerships” of donors can become an expensive end in themselves, merely delaying real action.
If donor governments really want results, they should take the money out of the hands of thirty or more separate aid bureaucracies and pool it in one or two places, the most logical being the World Bank in Washington and the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) in Rome.
One or both of these agencies would then have an account with several billion dollars.
Governments in hunger-stricken regions, especially Africa, would then submit national action plans that would provide details on how they would use the donor funds to get high-yield seeds, fertilizer, irrigation, farm tools, storage silos, and local advice to impoverished farmers.
An independent expert panel would review the national plans to verify their scientific and managerial coherence.
Assuming that a plan passes muster, the money to support it would quickly be disbursed.
Afterward, each national program would be monitored, audited, and evaluated.
This approach is straightforward, efficient, accountable, and scientifically sound.
Two major recent success stories in aid have used this approach: the Global Alliance on Vaccines and Immunizations, which successfully gets immunizations to young children, and the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, TB, and Malaria, which supports national action plans to battle these killer diseases.
Both have saved millions of lives during the past decade, and have paved the way to a new more efficient and scientifically sound method of development assistance.
Not surprisingly, many UN agencies and aid agencies in rich countries fight this approach.
All too often, the fight is about turf, rather than about the most effective way to speed help to the poor.
Obama, Rudd, Zapatero, and other forward-thinking leaders can therefore make a huge difference by following up on their pledges at the G-8 and insisting that the aid really works.
The bureaucracies must be bypassed to get help to where it is needed: in the soil tilled by the world’s poorest farm families.
A Black and White Question
NEW YORK – In the afternoon of July 16 two men appeared to be breaking into a fine house in an expensive area of Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Alerted by a telephone call, a policeman arrived smartly on the scene.
He saw one black male standing inside the house and asked him to come out.
The man refused.
He was then told to identify himself.
The man, still refusing to step out, said he was a Harvard professor, showed his ID, and warned the cop not to mess with him.
He said something about black men in America being singled out, and asked the cop, who was white, for his name and identification.
The cop, joined by several colleagues, arrested the professor for disorderly conduct.
We now know that the professor had broken into his own home, with the help of his chauffeur, because the door was jammed. 
What was unusual here was not the cop’s heavy-handedness.
Most people in the US know that if you talk back to the police, they will get nasty very fast.
The fact that the man was black might or might not have made the cop go for his handcuffs even sooner than he might normally have done.
That, too, would not have been unusual.
What made this case special was that Henry Louis “Skip” Gates is one of the most celebrated professors in the country, famous for his books, his articles, and numerous television appearances.
He is a grandee, a mover and shaker in the academic and media world, a friend of President Barack Obama.
That is why he warned the cop, Sgt. James Crowley, a veteran of the Cambridge police force, not to mess with him.
Class and race overlap in the US.
In this instance, it is impossible to pry them apart.
Gates, deeply conscious, indeed a specialist of the terrible history of race relations in his country, instinctively assumed that he was a victim of prejudice.
From his words it appears that he was equally conscious of not getting the proper respect due to a distinguished Harvard professor and media celebrity.
As he put it to his daughter in an interview published online: “[Crowley] should have gotten out of there and said, ‘I’m sorry, sir, good luck.
Loved your [television] series—check with you later!’”
Alas, Sgt.Crowley had never heard of Professor Gates.
A local man whose brothers all serve in the police force, a sports fan, and an amateur basketball coach, Crowley does not move in the same social circles as Gates.
As it happens, the charges were duly dropped, and there the case might have rested if President Obama, tired and frustrated after weeks of fighting for his healthcare bill, had not weighed in on behalf of his “friend” Gates, and called the police “stupid.”
Both he and Gates then spoke of “learning” from the incident.
Gates might even be planning a television documentary on racial profiling.
One thing to be learned, if we didn’t know this already, is how close racial sensitivities are to the surface of US life, despite the election of a black president.
The complexities of black anger, white guilt, and of black, and white fear, are so vexed that most Americans prefer not to talk about race at all.
The field is too full of mines.
One of Obama’s great achievements is that he made it into a serious topic through the brilliance and subtlety of his rhetoric.
One might argue that it
There is, however, a danger that it will have an adverse affect on the necessary national discussion about race.
By having made such a big issue out of what was in fact a relatively minor event Gates could be accused of trivializing much worse instances of abuse.
Indeed, we don’t even know for certain whether this was such an instance.
Crowley never mentioned the color of Gates’ skin. There was no question of violence.
There were just very raw nerves and hypersensitivity to hints of disrespect, on the part of the professor, and of the cop.
Outrage about a professor who is not to be messed with is not the best way to discuss the plight of countless, poor, anonymous people, whom most of us find it too easy to ignore.
A Bollywood Bride for Sarkozy?
PARIS &#45;&#45; Ever since French President Nicolas Sarkozy took himself off his country’s most-eligible-bachelor list by publicly acknowledging his affair with supermodel-turned-pop-musician Carla Bruni during a romantic trip to Euro Disney, he’s run into trouble. 
His ratings have dipped below 50% for the first time.
Older French citizens don’t find the public spectacle of their leader in love very amusing.
Abroad, Egyptian lawmakers were so exercised over the prospect of the French head of state sharing a bed with his girlfriend that several vented their disapproval on the floor of the parliament. 
Likewise, India is all in a quandary over how to handle protocol during Sarkozy’s impending visit to the subcontinent as the guest of honor at the country’s Republic Day celebrations on January 26.
Should the First Girlfriend have her own motorcade, as a first lady would?
Meanwhile, the same hard-right Hindu groups that protest Valentine’s Day as a decadent Western holiday have warned that if Sarkozy arrives with his girlfriend in tow, they’ll be out in the streets to welcome him.
This controversy has threatened to cast a pall over a much-heralded summit between two of the world’s great democracies.
With lucrative deals at stake for the big-ticket products that drive the French economy – military hardware, nuclear power plants, and Airbus planes – France has a strong interest in a successful summit in India.
“You’ll probably find out after it’s happened,” he taunted.
Rumor has it the couple has set February 8 or 9 for the wedding.   Others say that Sarkozy has already outsmarted the media by secretly marrying in the Elysee Palace, even as he was dodging wedding questions.
If that is true, then Sarkozy missed the romantic opportunity of a lifetime.
If the couple sizzled for cameras with Luxor and Petra as the backdrop, just imagine how hot things could get at the most romantic spot on Earth, the Taj Mahal.
And, given the current rage for all things Bollywood in France, a lavish Indian wedding would be fitting.
Bruni’s own life path closely resembles any number of Bollywood stars who have made the transition from model to actress.
A comely brunette who sings is perfect for a Bollywood makeover.
The Indian government will be nothing if not relieved to see the first girlfriend made a wife.
As one of India’s leading daily newspapers, the
Despite the sometimes downright pornographic on-screen writhing of Bollywood starlets, India is still a deeply conservative society.
Divorce is anathema. (Sarkozy is now twice divorced.)
And, while mistresses abound among the privileged classes, they do not strut publicly by their power-mates’ sides.
Kissing and fondling in public, even by spouses, is taboo.
In this respect, India more resembles the France with which Sarkozy wants to make a clean break than the current one.
Most Indians, as it seems many French, would prefer not to shed the “hypocrisy” Sarkozy laments on the part of his predecessors (read: former French President François Mitterrand, who had a child with his mistress about whom the public knew nothing until the man’s funeral).
Sarkozy, of all people, should know that a large part of the gravitas of office derives from pomp and circumstance.
Statecraft is a realm where appearances are meant to be deceiving.
When Sarkozy, who otherwise has such finely tuned media instincts, protests that he’s no different from any other man, he comes dangerously close to confusing the office and the person of the president.
Most French people could only dream of an exotic wedding in India.
Sarkozy could make that dream come true.
If he really is as head-over-heels in love with Bruni as he claims, and plans to marry her imminently, why not take advantage of his upcoming trip to India and make this a wedding to remember?
He could meet his bride seated majestically on the caparison of an elaborately decorated elephant, and she would look ravishing swathed and bejeweled in Indian finery.
The “bling-bling” president, as Sarkozy has been dubbed, can wear all the gold he wants and heap yet more diamonds on his bride. 
The cameras would roll, Indians would smile, and France would be treated to a Bollywood spectacle beyond its wildest dreams.
And if it’s too late for the wedding, there’s always the reception.
A Born-Again CAP
WAGENINGEN, NETHERLANDS – Born in 1957, the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) is now more than 50 years old, and the European Commission is proposing what it calls a health check for its middle-aged child.
But superficial repairs will not meet the European Union’s future needs. The CAP must be born again.
Work on its renewal is due to start now, with the completed project ready in 2013. But a much more profound re-think is needed.
The CAP’s original aim was to provide a secure source of food for the six original member states of the Union, which were importers of food and sought a degree of self-sufficiency.
Good, healthy, and cheap food had to be accessible for all citizens.
Improved agricultural productivity would benefit rural areas and give farmers a comparative share in the Union’s growing wealth.
Instruments to achieve those objectives were developed, and food security was achieved.
The CAP quickly came to be seen as the jewel in the crown of the European project.
As the EU has evolved and expanded, food systems have become more complex, involving production, processing, supply-chain organization, and wholesale and retail distribution, with all of these involving new issues like health and the environment.
The use of land is also receiving more serious scrutiny.
A 1991 study by the Netherlands Scientific Council for Governmental Policy, entitled
Those figures were for an EU of 15 countries, so with today’s 27 members the possibilities are even greater.
A Dutch analysis of land use has shown that by employing the best technical and ecological means on the best available land, substantial gains could be made in food production.
So it is not surprising that the number of farmers needed has fallen substantially.
A simplified CAP would encourage cleaner, more productive, and efficient agriculture.
A side benefit for the EU’s standing in the world could be that the World Trade Organization’s stalled Doha negotiations could be restarted once farmers in developing countries are assured of getting a fair deal from Europe.
Moreover, the CAP’s role as a motor of political and social integration in Europe could be restored once renewed policies are in place.
But renewal of this sort cannot be left to global market forces, as the results might not necessarily benefit European agriculture and society.
If the market “misbehaves,” farmers could be reduced to poverty, leading to the neglect of large areas of Europe.
That is a real enough danger to which policymakers must give serious thought as they reform the CAP on the basis of the following five pillars.
1.&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; The EU needs a knowledge and innovation policy that strengthens European agriculture’s competitiveness.
Such a policy has been successful in the Netherlands, substantially contributing to the development and power of the country’s agribusiness.
Ten of 21 branches of Dutch agribusiness, including horticultural seeds, ornamentals, seed potatoes, and veal, are among the top contributors to the national economy and the country’s trade balance.
In the EU as a whole, a policy directed toward research programs stimulating scientific excellence and greater coherence in the European knowledge system would greatly strengthen agriculture’s competitiveness and contribute to food security and sustainable development.
2.&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; Europe also needs a restructuring policy for land use.
Many structural improvement programs have been financed at the European level, but agricultural production and land use are not among them.
The development of an Agricultural Main Structure would compliment the European Ecological Main Structure.
Reforestation and the repair of natural ecosystems should also be part of a land use policy.
3.&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; A policy for European food systems would treat production, processing, distribution, logistics, and retailing in combination.
Consumption patterns and preferences are an integral part of such systems.
Preliminary studies by the European Science Foundation’s “Forward Look on European Food Systems” could prove useful in devising an EU-wide policy.
4.&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; Metropolitan agriculture in a rapidly urbanizing world can provide high-quality produce on small amounts of land.
It offers an answer to rising demand for healthy food with minimal environmental side effects.
5.&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; A new CAP should include a policy to safeguard Europe’s landscapes.
But a cultural heritage should not be maintained everywhere, nor should it ignore cost.
And it should not be a defensive policy of the sort that tends to concentrate on poor-quality land.
These five pillars involve drastic choices, but they will probably require less money from Europe’s taxpayers, not more.
They could make a real contribution to cleaner, more productive, and efficient farming and land use, while addressing social needs.
A Breakthrough Against Hunger
NEW YORK – Today’s world hunger crisis is unprecedentedly severe and requires urgent measures.
Nearly one billion people are trapped in chronic hunger – perhaps 100 million more than two years ago.
Spain is taking global leadership in combating hunger by inviting world leaders to Madrid in late January to move beyond words to action.
With Spain’s leadership and United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon’s partnership, several donor governments are proposing to pool their financial resources so that the world’s poorest farmers can grow more food and escape the poverty trap.
The benefits of some donor help can be remarkable.
Peasant farmers in Africa, Haiti, and other impoverished regions currently plant their crops without the benefit of high-yield seed varieties and fertilizers.
The result is a grain yield (for example, maize) that is roughly one-third less than what could be achieved with better farm inputs.
African farmers produce roughly one ton of grain per hectare, compared with more than four tons per hectare in China, where farmers use fertilizers heavily.
African farmers know that they need fertilizer; they just can’t afford it.
With donor help, they can.
Not only do these farmers then feed their families, but they also can begin to earn market income and to save for the future.
By building up savings over a few years, the farmers eventually become creditworthy, or have enough cash to purchase vitally necessary inputs on their own.
There is now widespread agreement on the need for increased donor financing for small farmers (those with two hectares or less of land, or impoverished pastoralists), which is especially urgent in Africa.
The UN Secretary General led a steering group last year that determined that African agriculture needs around $8 billion per year in donor financing – roughly four times the current total – with a heavy emphasis on improved seeds, fertilizer, irrigation systems, and extension training.
In addition to direct help for small farms, donors should provide more help for the research and development needed to identify new high-yielding seed varieties, especially to breed plants that can withstand temporary flooding, excess nitrogen, salty soils, crop pests, and other challenges to sustainable food production.
Helping the poor with today’s technologies, while investing in future improved technologies, is the optimum division of labor.
This investment pays off wonderfully, with research centers such as the International Rice Research Institute and the International Maize and Wheat Improvement Centre providing the high-yield seeds and innovative farming strategies that together triggered the Asian Green Revolution.
These centers are not household names, but they deserve to be.
Their scientific breakthroughs have helped to feed the world, and we’ll need more of them.
Dozens of low-income, food-deficit countries, perhaps as many as 40-50, have elaborated urgent programs for increased food production by small farms, but are currently held back by the lack of donor funding.
These countries have appealed to the World Bank for financing, and the Bank made a valiant effort in 2008 to help through its new Global Food Crisis Response Program (GFCRP).
But the Bank does not yet have sufficient funds to meet these countries’ urgent needs, and has had to ration assistance to a small fraction of the flows that could be effectively and reliably used.
Hundreds of millions of people, in the meantime, remain trapped in hunger.
Many individual donor countries have declared that they are now prepared to increase their financial support for smallholder agriculture, but are searching for the appropriate mechanisms to do so.
The current aid structures are inadequate.
The more than 20 bilateral and multilateral donor agencies for agriculture are highly fragmented and of insufficient scale individually and collectively.
Despite the dedicated efforts of many professionals, the response to the hunger crisis remains utterly inadequate.
The 2008 planting seasons came and went with much too little additional help for impoverished small farmers.
African countries search endlessly, and mostly fruitlessly, for the small amounts of funding needed for their purchases of fertilizer and improved seeds.
My colleagues and I, serving on an advisory committee for the Spanish initiative, have recommended that donors pool their funds into a single international account, which we call the Financial Coordination Mechanism (FCM).
These pooled funds would enable farmers in poor countries to obtain the fertilizer, improved seed varieties, and small-scale irrigation equipment that they urgently need.
Poor countries would receive prompt and predictable financing for agricultural inputs from a single account, rather than from dozens of distinct and fragmented donors.
By pooling financial resources into a single-donor FCM, aid programs’ administrative costs could be kept low, the availability of aid flows could be assured, and poor countries would not have to negotiate 25 times in order to receive help. 
The time for business as usual is over.
The donors promised to double aid to Africa by 2010, but are still far off track.
Indeed, during the past 20 years, they actually cut aid for agriculture programs, and only now are reversing course.
Meanwhile, a billion people go hungry each day.
We need a breakthrough that is demonstrable, public, clear, and convincing, that can mobilize the public’s hearts and minds, and that can demonstrate success.
History can be made in Madrid at the end of January, when the world’s richest and poorest countries converge to seek solutions to the global hunger crisis.
The lives of the billion poorest people depend on it.
A Breakthrough Opportunity for Global Health
NEW YORK – Every year, millions of people die from preventable and treatable diseases, especially in poor countries.
In many cases, lifesaving medicines can be cheaply mass-produced, but are sold at prices that block access to those who need them.
And many die simply because there are no cures or vaccines, because so little of the world’s valuable research talent and limited resources is devoted to addressing the diseases of the poor.
This state of affairs represents a failure of economics and law that urgently needs to be corrected.
The good news is that there are now opportunities for change, most promisingly through an international effort headed by the World Health Organization that would begin to fix the broken intellectual-property regime that is holding back the development and availability of cheap drugs.
Two main problems limit the availability of medicines today.
One is that they are very costly; or, more accurately, the price charged for them is very high, though the cost of producing them is but a fraction of that amount.
Second, drug development is geared toward maximizing profit, not social benefit, which skews efforts directed at the creation of medicines that are essential to human welfare.
Because the poor have so little money to spend, drug companies, under current arrangements, have little incentive to do research on the diseases that afflict them.
It doesn’t have to be this way.
Drug companies argue that high prices are necessary to fund research and development.
But, in the United States, it is actually the government that finances most health-related research and development – directly, through public support (National Institutes of Health, National Science Foundation), and indirectly, through public purchases of medicine, both in the Medicare and Medicaid programs.
Even the part that is not government-financed is not a conventional market; most individuals’ purchases of prescription medicines are covered by insurance.
Government finances health-care research because improved medicines are a public good.
The resulting knowledge benefits everyone by stopping epidemics and limiting the economic and human toll of widespread illness.
Efficiency requires sharing research as widely as possible as soon as it is available.
Thomas Jefferson compared knowledge to candles: when one is used to light another, it does not diminish the light of the first.
On the contrary, everything becomes brighter.
Yet, in America and most of the world, drug prices are still exorbitant and the spread of knowledge is tightly limited.
That is because we have created a patent system that gives innovators a temporary monopoly over what they create, which encourages them to hoard their knowledge, lest they help a competitor.
While this system does provide incentives for certain kinds of research by making innovation profitable, it allows drug companies to drive up prices, and the incentives do not necessarily correspond to social returns.
In the health-care sector, it may be more profitable to devote research to a “me-too” drug than to the development of a treatment that really makes a difference.
The patent system may even have adverse effects on innovation, because, while the most important input into any research is prior ideas, the patent system encourages secrecy.
A solution to both high prices and misdirected research is to replace the current model with a government-supported prize fund.
With a prize system, innovators are rewarded for new knowledge, but they do not retain a monopoly on its use.
That way, the power of competitive markets can ensure that, once a drug is developed, it is made available at the lowest possible price – not at an inflated monopoly price.
Fortunately, some US lawmakers are taking a strong interest in this approach.
The Prize Fund for HIV/AIDS Act, a congressional bill introduced by Senator Bernie Sanders, is just such an initiative.
His bill also contains an important provision aimed at encouraging open-source research, which would move the current research model away from secrecy toward sharing.
But, globally, our innovation system needs much bigger changes.
The WHO’s efforts to encourage broad reforms at the international level are crucial.
This spring, the WHO released a report that recommends solutions similar to those proposed in the US Senate bill, but on a global level.
Importantly, the report, “Research and Development to Meet Health Needs in Developing Countries,” recommends a comprehensive approach, including mandatory funding contributions from governments for research on developing countries’ health needs; international coordination of health-care priorities and implementation; and a global observatory that would monitor where needs are greatest.
In late May, the international community will have a chance to begin implementing these ideas at the WHO World Health Assembly – a moment of hope for public health around the world.
Reforming our innovation system is not just a matter of economics.
It is, in many cases, a matter of life and death.
It is therefore essential to de-link R&amp;D incentives from drug prices, and to promote greater sharing of scientific knowledge.
For America, the Sanders bill marks important progress.
For the world, the WHO’s recommendations represent a once-in-a-generation opportunity to remedy a long-standing and egregious inequity in health care, and, more broadly, to set a model for governance of global public goods befitting an era of globalization.
We cannot afford to let this opportunity pass us by.
Absent-Minded Killers
As a species, human beings have a major self-control problem.
We humans are now so aggressively fishing, hunting, logging, and growing crops in all parts of the world that we are literally chasing other species off the planet.
Our intense desire to take all that we can from nature leaves precious little for other forms of life.
In 1992, when the world’s governments first promised to address man-made global warming, they also vowed to head off the human-induced extinction of other species.
The Convention on Biological Diversity, agreed at the Rio Earth Summit, established that “biological diversity is a common concern of humanity.”
The signatories agreed to conserve biological diversity, by saving species and their habitats, and to use biological resources (e.g., forests) in a sustainable manner.
In 2002, the treaty’s signatories went further, committing to “a significant reduction in the current rate of biodiversity loss” by 2010.
Unfortunately, like so many other international agreements, the Convention on Biological Diversity remains essentially unknown, un-championed, and unfulfilled.
That neglect is a human tragedy.
For a very low cash outlay – and perhaps none at all on balance – we could conserve nature and thus protect the basis of our own lives and livelihoods.
We kill other species not because we must, but because we are too negligent to do otherwise.
Consider a couple of notorious examples.
Some rich countries, such as Spain, Portugal, Australia, and New Zealand, have fishing fleets that engage in so-called “bottom trawling.”
Bottom trawlers drag heavy nets over the ocean bottom, destroying magnificent, unexplored, and endangered marine species in the process.
Complex and unique ecologies, most notably underground volcanoes known as seamounts, are ripped to shreds, because bottom trawling is the “low cost” way to catch a few deep sea fish species.
One of these species, orange roughy, has been caught commercially for only around a quarter-century, but already is being fished to the point of collapse.
Likewise, in many parts of the world, tropical rainforest is being cleared for pasture land and food crops.
The result is massive loss of habitat and destruction of species, yielding a tiny economic benefit at a huge social cost.
After cutting down a swath of rainforest, soils are often quickly leached of their nutrients so that they cannot sustain crops or nutritious grasses for livestock.
As a result, the new pasture land or farmland is soon abandoned, with no prospect for regeneration of the original forest and its unique ecosystems.
Because these activities’ costs are so high and their benefits so low, stopping them would be easy.
Bottom trawling should simply be outlawed; it would be simple and inexpensive to compensate the fishing industry during a transition to other activities.
Forest clearing, on the other hand, is probably best stopped by economic incentives, perhaps combined with regulatory limits.
Simply restricting the practice of land clearing probably would not work, since farm families and communities would face a strong temptation to evade legal limits.
On the other hand, financial incentives would probably succeed, because cutting down forest to create pastureland is not profitable enough to induce farmers to forego payments for protecting the land.
Many rainforest countries have united in recent years to suggest the establishment of a rainforest conservation fund by the rich countries, to pay impoverished small farmers a small amount of money to preserve the forest.
A well-designed fund would slow or stop deforestation, preserve biodiversity, and reduce emissions of carbon dioxide the burning of cleared forests.
At the same time, small farmers would receive a steady flow of income, which they could use for micro-investments to improve their household’s wealth, education, and health.
Aside from banning bottom trawling and establishing a global fund for avoided deforestation, we should designate a global network of protected marine areas, in which fishing, boating, polluting, dredging, drilling, and other damaging activities would be prohibited.
Such areas not only permit the regeneration of species, but also provide ecological benefits that spill over to neighboring unprotected areas.
We also need a regular scientific process to present the world with the evidence on species abundance and extinction, just as we now have such a process for climate change.
Politicians don’t listen very well to individual scientists, but they are forced to listen when hundreds of scientists speak with a united voice.
Finally, the world should negotiate a new framework no later than 2010 to slow human-induced climate change.
There can be little doubt that climate change poses one of the greatest risks to species’ viability.
As the planet warms, and rain and storm patterns change dramatically, many species will find themselves in climate zones that no longer support their survival.
Some can migrate, but others (such as polar bears) are likely to be driven to extinction unless we take decisive action to head off climate change.
These measures are achievable by 2010.
They are affordable, and in each case would ultimately deliver large net benefits.
Most importantly, they would allow us to follow through on a global promise.
It is too painful to believe that humanity would destroy millions of other species – and jeopardize our own future – in a fit of absent-mindedness.
Making Do With More
BERKELEY – In the United States, just three out of ten workers are needed to produce and deliver the goods we consume.
Everything we extract, grow, design, build, make, engineer, and transport – down to brewing a cup of coffee in a restaurant kitchen and carrying it to a customer's table – is done by roughly 30% of the country's workforce.
The rest of us spend our time planning what to make, deciding where to install the things we have made, performing personal services, talking to each other, and keeping track of what is being done, so that we can figure out what needs to be done next.
And yet, despite our obvious ability to produce much more than we need, we do not seem to be blessed with an embarrassment of riches.
One of the great paradoxes of our time is that workers and middle-class households continue to struggle in a time of unparalleled plenty.
John Maynard Keynes was not off by much when he famously predicted in 1930 that the human race's “economic problem, the struggle for subsistence," was likely to be “solved, or be at least within sight of solution, within a hundred years."
It will take another generation, perhaps, before robots have completely taken over manufacturing, kitchen work, and construction; and the developing world looks to be 50 years behind. But Keynes would have been spot on had he targeted his essay at his readers' great-great-great-great grandchildren.
And yet there are few signs that working- and middle-class Americans are living any better than they did 35 years ago.
Even stranger, productivity growth does not seem to be soaring, as one would expect; in fact, it seems to be decelerating, according to research by John Fernald and Bing Wang, economists in the Economic Research Department of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
Growth prospects are even worse, as innovation hits gale-force headwinds.
One way to reconcile the changes in the job market with our lived experience and statistics like these is to note that much of what we are producing is very different from what we have made in the past.
For most of human experience, the bulk of what we produced could not be easily shared or used without permission.
The goods we made were what economists call “rival" and “excludible" commodities.
Being “rival" means that two people cannot use the same product at the same time.
Being “excludible" means that the owner of a product can easily prevent others from using it.
These two traits put a great deal of bargaining power in the hands of those who control production and distribution, making them ideal for a market economy based on private property.
Money naturally flows to where utility and value are being provided – and those flows are easy to track in national accounts.
But much of what we are producing in the information age is neither rival nor excludible – and this changes the entire picture.
The creation of information-age goods is difficult to incentivize; their distribution is hard to monetize; and we lack the tools to track them easily in national accounts.
The result is an ever-growing discrepancy between what people would be willing to pay for a given service and growth as measured in national statistics.
In other words, we are producing and consuming much more than our economic indicators suggest – and the creators of many of those products are not being adequately compensated.
This produces a set of unique problems.
To ensure that the workers of today and tomorrow are able to capture the benefits of the information age will require us to redesign our economic system to stimulate the creation of these new types of commodities.
In addition to developing ways to account for this new type of wealth, we will have to develop channels through which demand for a product contributes to the income of its creator.
Only by finding ways to put true value on the goods we produce will we be able to sustain a middle-class society, rather than one of techno-plutocrats and their service-sector serfs.
The Closing of the Academic Mind
LONDON – I would wager that I have been Chancellor of more universities than anyone alive today.
This is partly because when I was Governor of Hong Kong, I was made Chancellor of every university in the city.
I protested that it would surely be better for the universities to choose their own constitutional heads.
But the universities would not allow me to resign gracefully.
So for five years I enjoyed the experience of giving tens of thousands of students their degrees and watching what this rite of passage meant for them and their families.
When I came back to Britain in 1997, I was asked to become Chancellor of Newcastle University.
Then, in 2003, I was elected Chancellor by the graduates of Oxford University, one of the world’s greatest institutions of learning.
So it should not be surprising that I have strong views about what it means to be a university and to teach, do research, or study at one.
Universities should be bastions of freedom in any society.
They should be free from government interference in their primary purposes of research and teaching; and they should control their own academic governance.
I do not believe it is possible for a university to become or remain a world-class institution if these conditions do not exist.
The role of a university is to promote the clash of ideas, to test the results of research with other scholars, and to impart new knowledge to students.
Freedom of speech is thus fundamental to what universities are, enabling them to sustain a sense of common humanity and uphold the mutual tolerance and understanding that underpin any free society.
That, of course, makes universities dangerous to authoritarian governments, which seek to stifle the ability to raise and attempt to answer difficult questions.
But if any denial of academic liberty is a blow struck against the meaning of a university, the irony today is that some of the most worrying attacks on these values have been coming from inside universities.
In the United States and the United Kingdom, some students and teachers now seek to constrain argument and debate.
They contend that people should not be exposed to ideas with which they strongly disagree.
Moreover, they argue that history should be rewritten to expunge the names (though not the endowments) of those who fail to pass today’s tests of political correctness.
Thomas Jefferson and Cecil Rhodes, among others, have been targeted.
And how would Churchill and Washington fare if the same tests were applied to them?
Some people are being denied the chance to speak as well – so-called “no platforming”, in the awful jargon of some clearly not very literate campuses.
There are calls for “safe spaces” where students can be protected from anything that assaults their sense of what is moral and appropriate.
This reflects and inevitably nurtures a harmful politics of victimization – defining one’s own identity (and thus one’s interests) in opposition to others.
When I was a student 50 years ago, my principal teacher was a leading Marxist historian and former member of the Communist Party.
The British security services were deeply suspicious of him.
He was a great historian and teacher, but these days I might be encouraged to think that he had threatened my “safe space.”
In fact, he made me a great deal better informed, more open to discussion of ideas that challenged my own, more capable of distinguishing between an argument and a quarrel, and more prepared to think for myself.
Of course, some ideas – incitement of racial hatred, gender hostility, or political violence – are anathema in every free society.
Liberty requires some limits (decided freely by democratic argument under the rule of law) in order to exist.
Universities should be trusted to exercise that degree of control themselves.
But intolerance of debate, of discussion, and of particular branches of scholarship should never be tolerated.
As the great political philosopher Karl Popper taught us, the only thing we should be intolerant of is intolerance itself.
That is especially true at universities.
Yet some American and British academics and students are themselves undermining freedom; paradoxically, they have the liberty to do so.
Meanwhile, universities in China and Hong Kong are faced with threats to their autonomy and freedom, not from within, but from an authoritarian government.
In Hong Kong, the autonomy of universities and free speech itself, guaranteed in the city’s Basic Law and the 50-year treaty between Britain and China on the city’s status, are under threat.
The rationale seems to be that, because students strongly supported the pro-democracy protests in 2014, the universities where they study should be brought to heel.
So the city’s government blunders away, stirring up trouble, clearly on the orders of the government in Beijing.
Indeed, the Chinese authorities only recently showed what they think of treaty obligations and of the “golden age” of Sino-British relations (much advertised by British ministers), by abducting a British citizen (and four other Hong Kong residents) on the city’s streets.
The five were publishing books that exposed some of the dirty secrets of China’s leaders.
On the mainland, the Chinese Communist Party has launched the biggest crackdown on universities since the aftermath of the killings in Tiananmen Square in 1989.
There is to be no discussion of so-called Western values in China’s universities. Only Marxism can be taught.
Did no one tell President Xi Jinping and his Politburo colleagues where Karl Marx came from?
The trouble these days is precisely that they know little about Marx but a lot about Lenin.
Westerners should take a closer interest in what is happening in China’s universities and what that tells us about the real values underpinning scholarship, teaching, and the academy.
Compare and contrast, as students are asked to do.
Do you want universities where the government decides what it is allegedly safe for you to learn and discuss?
Or do you want universities that regard the idea of a “safe space” – in terms of closing down debate in case it offends someone – as an oxymoron in an academic setting?
Western students should think occasionally about their counterparts in Hong Kong and China who must fight for freedoms that they take for granted – and too often abuse.
The New Brain Drain in Science
DUBAI – In December 2013, the Nobel laureate physicist Peter Higgs told The Guardian that if he were seeking a job in academia today, “I don’t think I would be regarded as productive enough.”
Having published fewer than ten papers since his groundbreaking work in 1964, Higgs believes that no university would employ him nowadays.
Academics are well acquainted with the notion of “publish or perish.”
They must publish their work in peer-reviewed journals increasingly often to climb the career ladder, protect their jobs, and secure funding for their institutions.
But what happens to scientists and other scholars, such as those in the Middle East, who have different research concerns from – and scant connections to – the professional journals that can make or break an academic/scientific career?
Scholars and institutions with high publishing rates in the established journals receive better productivity scores, which translate into bigger rewards, in terms of enhanced careers and greater research funding.
Whether the work they are publishing has a measurable impact on their field of study is, sadly, too often a secondary concern.
The incentives they face mean that quantity often comes before quality.
Academic journals determine the various disciplinary rankings that academic institutions are compelled to climb, which leads institutions to hire and retain only those scholars who can produce at high rates.
This has given rise to a deeper, twofold problem: academic journals have become disproportionately influential, and they have placed a premium on empirical research.
With respect to the first problem, journals are gradually replacing institutions as the arbiters of quality within academic communities.
Scholars in almost any discipline seeking jobs at “A-level” institutions must publish in a select few A-level journals that are seen as gateways.
These journals’ editorial boards increasingly privilege positivist theoretical work – meaning research that is based on empirical data analysis.
Qualitative research – such as ethnographies, participatory surveys, and case studies – is often designated as suitable only for B- and C-level journals.
Academics conducting empirical research have a big advantage over those carrying out qualitative work, because they can use efficient software and powerful computers to test their hypotheses quickly and account for different variables in data sets.
This kind of work can be cheaper, too, because a single data set can generate multiple journal articles.
To be sure, there is nothing wrong with scientific practices evolving along with technology, or with academics using richer data sets and better software.
But adoption of this quantitative approach should not be the single most important criterion for assessing scientific excellence and deciding career trajectories.
After all, knowledge is acquired in different ways, and empirical positivism is only one method in a larger epistemological inventory.
The positivist trend in science today is particularly problematic for developing countries, where data sets are scarce and often of poor quality.
Thus, scientists working in developing countries face a dilemma: either work on rich-world problems for which there is abundant data, or risk career advancement by conducting qualitative work that will not make it into A-level journals.
Academics who move from data-rich countries in Europe and North America to data-poor countries in the Middle East and elsewhere often face this problem.
As researchers at my institution in Abu Dhabi know, conducting surveys for qualitative research is feasible; but generating rich data from scratch for theory-building research is extremely difficult.
At the International Conference on Science and Technology Indicators this year, a French academic researching soil in Africa reported that only 5% of the published work in his field has originated from African researchers.
When he dug deeper into his own research, he found that 50% of what he had learned about African soil came from African researchers, who have not or could not publish their work in international academic journals.
Countries where English is not the lingua franca are particularly disadvantaged in science, not because they lack academic excellence, but because English-language journals call the shots.
Non-English academic journals simply do not command the same attention in the science community.
As a result, the scope of research topics that many countries can undertake is limited, and they must struggle to retain scientific talent.
This is particularly true in the Middle East, where governments are struggling to diversify their economies, in order to make them more resilient.
As English-language empirical-research journals consolidate their hold on the channels that determine whether or not a scientist will have a successful career, developing countries will have to invest heavily in their own data infrastructure to place domestic researchers on a more competitive footing.
But even – or especially – if developing countries do make such investments, much will be lost to science.
With (mostly) United States-based academic journals reigning over global science, no one has to move to become part of a new brain drain, whereby scientists’ research priorities, problems, and methods gravitate to the dominant positivist epistemology, at the expense of all alternatives.
Polluters Must Pay
NEW YORK – When BP and its drilling partners caused the Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico in 2010, the United States government demanded that BP finance the cleanup, compensate those who suffered damages, and pay criminal penalties for the violations that led to the disaster.
BP has already committed more than $20 billion in remediation and penalties.
Based on a settlement last week, BP will now pay the largest criminal penalty in US history – $4.5 billion.
The same standards for environmental cleanup need to be applied to global companies operating in poorer countries, where their power has typically been so great relative to that of governments that many act with impunity, wreaking havoc on the environment with little or no accountability.
As we enter a new era of sustainable development, impunity must turn to responsibility.
Polluters must pay, whether in rich or poor countries.
Major companies need to accept responsibility for their actions.
Nigeria has been Exhibit A of corporate environmental impunity.
For decades, major oil companies, including Shell, ExxonMobil, and Chevron, have been producing oil in the Niger Delta, an ecologically fragile environment of freshwater swamp forests, mangroves, lowland rainforests, and coastal barrier islands.
This rich habitat supports remarkable biodiversity – or did before the oil companies got there –&#160;and more than 30 million local inhabitants, who depend on the local ecosystems for their health and livelihoods.
Twenty years ago, the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources classified the Niger Delta as a region of high biodiversity of marine and coastal flora and fauna – tree species, fish, birds, and mammals, among other forms of life – and therefore rated it as a very high priority for conservation.
Yet it also noted that the region’s biodiversity was under massive threat, with little or no protection.
The global companies operating in the delta have spilled oil and flared natural gas for decades, without regard for the natural environment and the communities impoverished and poisoned by their actions.
One estimate puts the cumulative spills over the past 50 years at approximately 10 million barrels – twice the size of the BP spill.
The data are uncertain: there have been many thousands of spills during this period – often poorly documented and their magnitude hidden or simply unmeasured by either the companies or the government.
Indeed, just as BP was being hit with new criminal penalties, ExxonMobil announced yet another pipeline leak in the Niger Delta.
The environmental destruction of the delta is part of a larger saga: corrupt companies operating hand in hand with corrupt government officials.
The companies routinely bribe officials to gain oil leases, lie about output, evade taxes, and dodge responsibility for the environmental damage that they cause.
Nigerian officials have become fabulously wealthy, owing to decades of payoffs by international companies that have plundered the delta’s natural wealth.
Shell, the largest foreign operator in the Niger Delta, has been criticized repeatedly for its egregious practices and its unwillingness to be held to account.
Meanwhile, the local population has remained impoverished and beset by diseases caused by unsafe air, poisoned drinking water, and pollution in the food chain.
Local lawlessness has led to gang warfare and persistent illegal tapping into the pipelines to steal oil, leading to further massive oil spills and frequent explosions that kill dozens, including innocent bystanders.
In the colonial era, it was the official purpose of imperial power to extract wealth from the administered territories.
In the post-colonial period, the methods are better disguised.
When oil companies misbehave in Nigeria or elsewhere, they are protected by the power of their home countries.
Don’t mess with the companies, they are told by the United States and Europe.
Indeed, one of the largest bribes (a reputed $180 million) paid in recent times in Nigeria was by Halliburton, a company tightly intertwined with US political power.
(Dick Cheney went from being Halliburton’s CEO to the US vice presidency.)
Last year, the United Nations Environment Program (UNEP) issued a remarkable report on Ogoniland, a major ethnic homeland in the Niger Delta that has been at the epicenter of conflict between local communities and international oil.
The report was as scathing as it was scientifically clear.
The SDGs offer a critical opportunity for the world to set clear, compelling standards for government and corporate behavior.
Many major companies, including in the oil industry, have expressed their readiness to support sustainable development goals.
Cleaning up the Niger Delta would provide the strongest possible example of a new age of accountability.
Shell, Chevron, ExxonMobil, and other major oil companies should step forward and help to fund the necessary cleanup, ushering in a new era of responsibility.
The Nigerian government’s own accountability is on the line as well.
It is heartening that several Nigerian senators have recently been in the forefront of efforts to strengthen the rule of law in the oil sector.
The cleanup of the Niger Delta provides an ideal opportunity for Nigeria, the oil industry, and the international community to show convincingly that a new age has dawned.
From now on, sustainable development must not be a mere slogan, but rather an operational approach to global governance and well-being on a strained and crowded planet.
A Centerless Euro Cannot Hold
CAMBRIDGE – With youth unemployment touching 50% in eurozone countries such as Spain and Greece, is a generation being sacrificed for the sake of a single currency that encompasses too diverse a group of countries to be sustainable?
If so, does enlarging the euro’s membership really serve Europe’s apparent goal of maximizing economic integration without necessarily achieving full political union?
The good news is that economic research does have a few things to say about whether Europe should have a single currency.
The bad news is that it has become increasingly clear that, at least for large countries, currency areas will be highly unstable unless they follow national borders.
At a minimum, currency unions require a confederation with far more centralized power over taxation and other policies than European leaders envision for the eurozone.
What of Nobel Prize winner Robert Mundell’s famous 1961 conjecture that national and currency borders need not significantly overlap?
In his provocative American Economic Review paper “A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas,” Mundell argued that as long as workers could move within a currency region to where the jobs were, the region could afford to forgo the equilibrating mechanism of exchange-rate adjustment.
He credited another (future) Nobel Prize winner, James Meade, for having recognized the importance of labor mobility in earlier work, but criticized Meade for interpreting the idea too stringently, especially in the context of Europe’s nascent integration.
Mundell did not emphasize financial crises, but presumably labor mobility is more important today than ever.
Not surprisingly, workers are leaving the eurozone’s crisis countries, but not necessarily for its stronger northern region.
Instead, Portuguese workers are fleeing to booming former colonies such as Brazil and Macau.
Irish workers are leaving in droves to Canada, Australia, and the United States.
Spanish workers are streaming into Romania, which until recently had been a major source of agricultural labor in Spain.
Still, if intra-eurozone mobility were anything like Mundell’s ideal, today we would not be seeing 25% unemployment in Spain while Germany’s unemployment rate is below 7%.
Later writers came to recognize that there are other essential criteria for a successful currency union, which are difficult to achieve without deep political integration.
Peter Kenen argued in the late 1960’s that without exchange-rate movements as a shock absorber, a currency union requires fiscal transfers as a way to share risk.
For a normal country, the national income-tax system constitutes a huge automatic stabilizer across regions.
In the US, when oil prices go up, incomes in Texas and Montana rise, which means that these states then contribute more tax revenue to the federal budget, thereby helping out the rest of the country.
Europe, of course, has no significant centralized tax authority, so this key automatic stabilizer is essentially absent.
Some European academics tried to argue that there was no need for US-like fiscal transfers, because any desired degree of risk sharing can, in theory, be achieved through financial markets.
This claim was hugely misguided.
Financial markets can be fragile, and they provide little capacity for sharing risk related to labor income, which constitutes the largest part of income in any advanced economy.
Kenen was mainly concerned with short-term transfers to smooth out cyclical bumpiness.
But, in a currency union with huge differences in income and development levels, the short term can stretch out for a very long time.
Many Germans today rightly feel that any system of fiscal transfers will morph into a permanent feeding tube, much the way that northern Italy has been propping up southern Italy for the last century.
Indeed, more than 20 years on, Western Germans still see no end in sight for the bills from German unification.
Later, Maurice Obstfeld pointed out that, in addition to fiscal transfers, a currency union needs clearly defined rules for the lender of last resort.
Otherwise, bank runs and debt panics will be rampant.
Obstfeld had in mind a bailout mechanism for banks, but it is now abundantly clear that one also needs a lender of last resort and a bankruptcy mechanism for states and municipalities.
A logical corollary of the criteria set forth by Kenen and Obstfeld, and even of Mundell’s labor-mobility criterion, is that currency unions cannot survive without political legitimacy, most likely involving region-wide popular elections.
Europe’s leaders cannot carry out large transfers across countries indefinitely without a coherent European political framework.
European policymakers today often complain that, were it not for the US financial crisis, the eurozone would be doing just fine.
Perhaps they are right.
But any financial system must be able to withstand shocks, including big ones.
Europe may never be an “optimum” currency area by any standard.
But, without further profound political and economic integration – which may not end up including all current eurozone members – the euro may not make it even to the end of this decade.
Achieving a “Europe of Results”
BRUSSELS – The tsunami that has swept across financial markets is a global catastrophe.
If handled correctly, however, the crisis may yet raise the esteem of the European Union and its institutions.
The EU’s legitimacy problem has two different aspects: apathy, leading to a low turnout in the European parliamentary elections, and outright euro-skepticism.
The voter-turnout problem partly reflects frustration about the present state of the EU, and also people’s impression that they can exert little influence by voting one way or the other.
Euro-skepticism, on the other hand, and the looming threat of anti-European populism, is directly linked to the idea that the EU is not merely incapable of offering a solution to the crisis, but in fact is part of the problem.
So, although the EU represents our best hope of ensuring that Europe is internationally competitive in today’s increasingly difficult environment, it is actually being blamed for globalization.
Many people confuse these two aspects of the EU’s legitimacy problem, and believe that somehow turnout in European elections can be increased by pointing out to people how good and important the EU is.
But in most cases, this is not possible.
At first sight, the easiest answer to the problem of low voter turnout is to give more power to the European Parliament.
But if this was the solution, then we would not have had steadily declining turnouts since the high point of 63%, at the first elections to the European Parliament in 1979. After all, since then the EP’s influence and powers of joint decision-making have grown constantly.
The trouble is that, EP elections must be “about” something if voters are to be interested, which means they must involve a real choice.
And a real choice requires Europe-wide election campaigns by all parties. This would also involve making the choice of the European Commission’s president dependent on the outcome of the EP elections.
But, in fact, both of these conditions have already been met; in 2004, Portuguese Prime Minister José Manuel Durão Barroso was appointed President of the Commission because he came from the political organization with the strongest election result, the European People’s Party.
And this year’s elections saw a more intensive presence of party organizations at European level than ever before.
Instead, I believe that the most important way to reawaken voters’ interest in European elections will be to open up the election of the Commission’s President to them, and create a genuinely Europe-wide political debate during the next election campaign.
The Euro-skepticism problem can be tackled only if the Union itself starts to perform better, and is seen to be doing so.
That is why in the aftermath of the failed referenda four years ago in France and the Netherlands on the Constitutional treaty, the Commission tried to emphasize the idea of a “Europe of Results” that would seek to convince citizens of its worth through concrete achievements.
Given the gravity of the economic crisis, the time has come for the EU to demonstrate its strengths whenever possible.
The aim must be not only to win back the hearts of Europeans who have become skeptical, but also to convince them that the Union is indispensable to meeting the challenges Europeans face.
Europe’s citizens understand that the relatively small nation-states that make up the EU are no longer able to face these enormous challenges on their own.
In Ireland, last autumn’s financial crisis provoked a turnaround in public opinion about the EU, and even in Iceland, although it lies on the periphery of our continent, membership of the EU and the euro have become a priority.
European countries have become so interconnected that isolated national measures on issues like financial-market regulation are hopeless.
A changing world in which new powers like China and India play an increasingly important role will not wait for Europe to make up its mind.
The EU must instead show leadership through its efforts to solve the world’s current problems.
As for the European People’s Party, for us the economy is not an end in itself but should serve the people.
The economic crisis was caused by shortsightedness and a lack of control in the global financial system. Now we must redefine the role of regulators in financial markets and in the wider economy, for we cannot let the financial sector walk off with the profits and leave taxpayers bearing the losses.
That doesn’t mean that we are advocating a move to socialism; we want better and smarter regulation, not regulation for its own sake.
We see five keys to recovery:
New job creation must be a core priority, with reform and investment in education and life-long learning necessary to create opportunity for all;
A “Europe of Results” is achievable.
It can strengthen the EU’s legitimacy, though, only if policy recommendations such as these, and the successes that result from implementing them, are communicated clearly and effectively to the general public.
Roadmap Pendidikan 2030
LONDON – Ketika mengunjungi kamp pengungsi Zaatari di Yordania awal tahun ini, saya menemui anak-anak yang mengutarakan makna pendidikan bagi mereka.
Bagi pemuda-pemudi asal Suriah yang terpaksa meninggalkan rumah dan semua harta benda yang dimiliki, pendidikan lebih dari sekadar kualifikasi atau nilai ujian; pendidikan mewakili harapan mereka untuk masa depan.
Anak-anak yang hidup di penampungan seperti Zaatari dan jutaan lainnya di seluruh dunia merupakan pokok dari International Commission on Financing Global Education Opportunity, sebuah forum yang saya ikuti sejak September tahun lalu.
Komisi tersebut berkomitmen terhadap Tujuan 4 dari rumusan PBB tentang Sustainable Development Goals (Tujuan Pembangunan Berkelanjutan), yang bertujuan “menjamin pendidikan yang inklusif dan berkualitas serta mendorong kesempatan belajar seumur hidup bagi semua orang” pada tahun 2030.
Prospek realisasi tujuan tersebut masih jauh dari sempurna.
Di tengah isu-isu pembangunan lainnya yang menuntut perhatian kita, para pembuat kebijakan harus ingat bahwa pendidikan sangat fundamental; tapi di luar itu, pendidikan akan menjadi katalisator bagi kemajuan pembangunan lainnya.
Sebagaimana bunyi peribahasa kuno Afrika, mendidik seorang anak perempuan sama dengan mendidik sebuah bangsa.
Jaminan akses kepada pendidikan berkualitas bagi anak bangsa, terutama perempuan, akan berefek pada penurunan jumlah perkawinan anak di bawah umur dan buruh anak serta eksploitasi.
Pendidikan memiliki manfaat sosial jangka panjang: selain dari perluasan partisipasi politik, anak-anak yang berpendidikan akan menyumbangkan modal intelektualnya dan mengejar peluang-peluang kewirausahaan ketika mereka tumbuh, sehingga menggiatkan pertumbuhan ekonomi.
Kendala-kendala yang marak di dunia pendidikan bisa diatasi melalui dua prinsip yang melekat dalam tujuan tersebut.
Pertama, “bagi semua” (“for all”) berarti kita harus fokus pada anak-anak yang tertinggal.
Jutaan anak kini mengalami putus sekolah atau hanya mendapat pendidikan mutu rendah karena asal-usul atau tempat tinggal mereka.
Menurut UN High Commissioner for Refugees, kemungkinan anak-anak pengungsi mengalami putus sekolah adalah lima kali lebih besar dibandingkan anak-anak di negara yang menampung pengungsi.
Selain itu, di semua negara Afrika (kecuali dua negara), jumlah anak perempuan yang menyelesaikan pendidikan dasar masih lebih rendah dibandingkan anak laki-laki.
Diperlukan pendekatan baru yang menjawab persoalan eksklusi dan membuat pendidikan terjangkau dan relevan, agar anak-anak pun termotivasi untuk bersekolah dan menyelesaikan studinya.
Kedua, “berkualitas” (“quality”): pendidikan haruslah efektif agar anak-anak betul-betul mendapat pembelajaran.
Bagi 61 juta anak-anak yang terputus dari pendidikan dasar, pendidikan formal mustahil akan terpenuhi.
Tetapi, sama mendesaknya, lebih dari sepertiga anak usia sekolah dasar – 250 juta anak – tidak mendapatkan pembelajaran yang sifatnya mendasar, menurut temuan dalam UNESCO Education for All Global Monitoring Report.
Meski setengah diantaranya sudah mengenyam pendidikan selama setidaknya empat tahun.
Kita harus mengatasi hambatan-hambatan pembelajaran, baik di ruang kelas maupun di rumah, melalui perbaikan kualitas pengajaran dan kondisi ruang kelas serta mengajarkan cara-cara kepada orangtua untuk mendukung pendidikan anaknya.
Investasi tambahan diperlukan untuk menjunjung tinggi kedua prinsip di atas.
Tahun lalu, UNESCO memperkirakan pemerintah harus melipatgandakan belanja pendidikan dari porsi pendapatan negara untuk mencapai tujuan tersebut pada tahun 2030.
Dengan demikian, perlu adanya kenaikan pendapatan dari pajak dan pengintensifan upaya untuk mengumpulkan piutang negara.
Contohnya, hanya sepertiga dana bantuan pendidikan yang dikucurkan ke Afrika, meskipun di kawasan tersebut hampir dua pertiga anak-anak mengalami putus sekolah.
Selain itu, saat ini anggaran pendidikan umumnya regresif, sementara hampir setengah pengeluaran di negara-negara termiskin dialokasikan untuk porsi 10% penduduk yang paling berpendidikan.
Penyempurnaan investasi pendidikan mengharuskan tindakan atas dua bidang utama.
Pertama, kita memerlukan pembiayaan yang adil, yang mana investasi tambahan harus disediakan untuk pertumbuhan dan perawatan anak usia dini, sebab tindakan ini memiliki potensi terbesar untuk menghasilkan return.
Anggaran harus difokuskan untuk kelompok anak yang paling termarginalkan, dan pendidikan dasar harus digratiskan agar setiap anak bisa menikmati pembelajaran.
Kita juga sangat memerlukan transparansi dan akuntabilitas, jadi anggaran tersebut akan terbuka dan masyarakat pun bisa menyuarakan pendapatnya sesuai tata kelola yang berlaku.
Kedua, sistem pendidikan dalam negeri perlu diperkuat agar pemerintah bisa memenuhi perannya sebagai penyedia pendidikan berkualitas bagi warganya, bukan mengalihkan peran tersebut kepada badan pembangunan asing.
Selain itu, kita harus mendorong kerja sama antar pemerintah dan pelaku bisnis untuk meningkatkan sumber daya lokal untuk pendidikan, dan menghilangkan aliran modal tidak sah yang menggerogoti sumber pendanaan yang dimiliki pemerintah, seperti akibat dari penggelapan pajak dan pencucian uang lintas batas.
Mengingat sejumlah prioritas di atas, komisi pendidikan akan menyampaikan rekomendasinya di hadapan sidang Majelis Umum PBB pada tanggal 18 September, ketika Sekretaris Jenderal akan mendengarkan dan melaksanakannya.
Komisi pendidikan akan dinilai berhasil jika kami bisa meningkatkan pendanaan dan kemauan politik untuk menjamin setiap anak bisa belajar, terlepas dari jumlah pemasukan, lokasi, atau status sosialnya.
Pekerjaan kita belum berakhir sampai keinginan tersebut terwujud.
«Трампономиканың»  осал жері
НЬЮ-ХЕЙВЕН – Дональд Трамптың экономикалық стратегиясы негізінен дұрыс емес.  Жаңадан сайланған АҚШ президенті үнемдеудің созылмалы тапшылығы бар елде мемлекеттік бюджет тапшылығын қаржыландыру есебінен экономикалық өсуді қалпына келтіруге ниеттеніп отыр.
Бұл қазірдің өзінде нормадан әлдеқайда жоғары сауда тапшылығын еріксіз арттыруға апаратын ұлттық жинақ ақшасының одан әрі азаюына апарады.
Бұл динамика  «Трампономиканың»  осал жерін ашып көрсетеді: экономикалық өсуді сақтап қалу үшін шетел валютасындағы жинақтар және сауда тапшылығына Американың тәуелділігіне қайшы келетін тұрпайы протекционистік үрдіс.
Трамптың әкімшілігі күшті де тұрақты да емес американдық экономиканыны мұраға алады.
Ұлы құлдыраудан кейін қалпына келтіру қарқыны қалыпты циклдік жаңғыртудың тек жартысындай ғана - және бұл 2008-2009 жылдардағы айтарлықтай қысқартулар аясында орын алуда.
Және өкінішке орай, болашақтағы экономикалық  өсудің «егіс дәні» болып табылатын жинақтар тапшылығы жалғасуда.
Ұлттық жинақтардың таза мөлшерлемесі -  кәсіпорындар, үй шаруашылығы және мемлекеттің жинақтары, девальвацияны ескере отырғанда, 2016 жылдың бірінші жартысында ұлттық табыстың тек 2,4%-ын құрады. Ол 2008-2011 жылдарда жинақтар бойынша теріс позициямен салыстырғанда, жақсару болып саналса да,  ХХ ғасырдың соңғы үш онжылдығында болған 6,3% орташа мәннен айтарлықтау артта қалып отыр.
Бұл өте маңызды, өйткені Трамп қарсы шыққан деструктивті сауда тапшылығының себебін түсіндіреді.  Жинақтар тапшылығы және экономикалық өсу ынтасы тұрғысынан, АҚШ жетіспейтін жинақтарды шетелден импорттауы керек.
Ағымдағы төлем мен сауда теңгерімінің теріс сальдосы - шетелдік капиталды тартудың жалғыз жолы.
Бұл сандармен расталады: 2000 жылы ұлттық жинақтар деңгейі орташа көрсеткіштен айтарлықтай төмендегенде, ағымдағы төлем теңгерімінің теріс сальдосы  ЖІӨ-нің 3,8% -ын құрайтын орташа мәнге дейін өсті, бұл 1970 жылдан 1999 жылға дейінгі кезеңдегі 1% -бен салыстырғанда шамамен төрт есе артық.
Сол сияқты, таза сауда тапшы��ығы - елдің сауда теңгерімсіздігінің ең толық көрсеткіші - 2000 жылдан бері ЖІӨ-нің 4% -ын құрады, салыстыру үшін - ХХ ғасырдың соңғы үш онжылдығанда орташа мәні 1,1% болған.
«Трампономиканың» даму динамикасының осындай кейін бұруына себеп-салдары бар.
Ол Қытай мен Мексика тәрізді, сауда тапшылығы туындайтын елдерге ерекше көңіл бөліп, осы екіжақты тапшылық Америкада әлдеқайда тереңірек жинақтау мәселесінің белгісі екенін назардан тыс қалдыруда.
Бір сәтке делік, АҚШ, сауда тапшылығының ең ірі бірінші және төртінші компоненттері Қытай және Мексикамен тарифтер мен басқа да протекционистік шаралар арқылы саудасын тоқтатты деп ойлап көрейік (Солтүстік Америка еркін сауда жүйесіне (НАФТА) қатысты ұсынылған қайта келіссөздер жүргізу және Мексика қаржыландыратын шекара дауалын салуды қоса алғанда). Американың созылмалы жинақ тапшылығы проблемасын шешпей, сауда тапшылығының Қытай және Мексика компоненттері жай ғана басқа елдерге қайта бөлінеді және олар жоғары шығынды өндірушілер болуы ықтимал.  Нәтижесі мүшкіл халде жүрген американдық орта тапты отбасыларға салынатын салықтарды арттырудың функционалдық баламасы болады.
Бір сөзбен айтқанда, екі жақты іс-шаралармен көп жақты проблемалары шешіле алмайды. 2015 жылы АҚШ-тың 101 елмен сауда тапшылығы болды -бұл жинақ тапшылығының нәтижесі болып табылатын көп жақты мәселе және жеке елдерге сәйкес келген «құралдар» көмегімен тиімді шешілуі мүмкін емес.
Бұл АҚШ сауда әріптестері міндеттерін жауапсыз орындады және олар жазаланауы керек деу емес.
Алайда, Америка Құрама Штаттары, қайтадан жинақтарын толтыра бастамаса бұл теңгерімсіздік салдары болып табылатын, елдегі айқын созылмалы сауда тапшылығы мен жұмыспен қамтамасыз ету проблемаларын шешу үшін аз үміт бар дегенді білдіреді.
Өкінішке орай, сценарий күрделінуде.
«Трампономика» да  алдағы жылдары АҚШ қорларының тапшылығы проблемасын қоздыратындай. Tax Policy Center, the Tax Foundation, және Moody’s Analytics жасаған талдауларға сәйкес, алдағы он жылда, Трамп экономикалық жоспарын жүзеге асырса, федералдық бюджет тапшылығы ЖІӨ-нің кем дегенде 7% -ына оралады деп көрсетеді.
Трамптың экономикалық саясат бойынша аға кеңесшілері Питер Наварро және Уилбур Росс қыркүйекте жасалған өз позициясын көрсету меморандумда олар бұл болжау жарамсыз екенін айтты, себебі ол нормативтік және энергетикалық реформалардан алынатын «өсуді ынталандыратын күтпеген пайданы»  немесе Американың сауда тапшылығын күрт қысқарту нәтижесінде алынатын қосымша табысты ескермейді деді.
Шынында, Наварро-Росс талдауы «Трампономикадан» түскен күтпеген, табыс өсуін ынталандыратын пайданың толық 73%-ын алдағы онжылдықта жалпы сауда балансында жаппай дамуға тіркейді.
Дегенмен, ұлттық жинақтарда ғажайып өсу толқыны орын алмаса бұның бәрі екіталай.
Креативті есептің ұсыныс экономикасының басты өнімі ретінде бұрын алды мұндай қиялы бай емес еді.
Мұнда «Трампономиканың» ең айқын үйлеспейтін жағы жатыр.
Ұлттық үнемдеу бұрын-соңды болмаған үлкен қысымға таяп қалған уақытта сауданы  қатаңдату шараларын іске асыру ешбір ойға сыймайды.
Мемлекеттік бюджет тапшылығының ең шамалы есептемелеріне қарағанда  қазірдің өзінде қатты азайған таза ұлттық жинақ коэффициенті 2018-2019 жылдарының бір кезеңінде қайта теріс секторға кіруі мүмкін. Яғни, бұл ағымдағы төлем және сауда балансының теріс сальдосына жаңа қысым көрсетіп, жұмыс орындары және табыстан айрылуды қайта қалпына келтіруді қиындата түседі, саясаткерлер болса бұл үшін тез  арада Американың сауда әріптестері кінәлі деп жариялайды.
Қызығы, алдағы жинақтау корларының қысқару дәуірінде, АҚШ шетелден келетін артық қаражат жинақтарына барған сайын тәуелді болады.
Трамп әкімшілігі ірі шетелдік кредиторларға - атап айтқанда, Қытайға көзделсе - оның стратегиясы тез уақытта кері нәтиже беруі мүмкін. Кем дегенде, Американың шетелден қарыз алу шарттарына кері әсері болуы мүмкін; қазірдің өзінде айқын болып табылатын жоғары пайыздық мөлшерлемелер орын алып және түбінде долларды түсіретін қысым болуы мүмкін.
Және, әрине, ғаламдық сауда соғысының ушығуы орын алатын ең нашар сценарий де бар.
Протекционизм, әлсіз жинақтау және мемлекеттік бюджет тапшылығын қаржыландыру аса «улы коктейльді»  құрайды.
«Трампономика» барысында, Американың ұлылыған қайта қайтару өте қиын болады.
A Clarion Call for Emerging Markets
ITHACA – With 2012 underway, it is worth reflecting on how a decade of strong economic growth in emerging markets led to last year’s resounding political transformations.
From the dramatic events in the Middle East, to the groundswell of support for the anti-corruption crusader Anna Hazare in India, leaders in emerging markets are getting a clear message from the streets that growth is not everything.
They ignore this message at their peril.
Emerging-market economies delivered solid growth during the 2000’s, and even survived the global financial crisis without a growth collapse.
But the specter of rising corruption is compromising the legitimacy of their economic gains and eroding support for further reforms needed to sustain their growth momentum.
Corruption takes many forms, but, in emerging markets, a combination of factors has turned it into a cancer that ultimately topples regimes.
Relentless low-level corruption is a major irritant for poor people in many of these countries; indeed, it limits their access to the social services and basic government functions that they often depend upon for their very survival.
Another type of corruption involves siphoning enormous sums of money from large-scale projects.
In India, for example, the government lost as much as $30-40 billion of much-needed revenue when coveted band spectrum was sold through a rigged auction.
For ordinary people, large-scale corruption is less visible, because, while the sums involved are mind-boggling, the costs are not as directly felt as they are in the case of lower-level graft.
But the perception of this type of mega-corruption has changed as rapid growth has increased inequality.
In countries like China and India, rapid economic growth has lifted a huge number of people out of poverty.
But the fruits of globalization and rapid growth have not been evenly shared – the rich become super-rich, even as a large fraction of the population remains destitute.
Rising income inequality is hardly limited to emerging markets, but their combination of open corruption and pervasive inequities creates a toxic brew that is undermining support for reforms that would strengthen and consolidate their economic gains.
In many emerging markets, a lack of political freedom adds to the combustible mix.
The combination of corruption, inequality, and political repression builds up enormous pressure, and there are no institutional channels through which to release it.
But freer political regimes are not a panacea.
In a democracy like India’s, the politically well-connected benefit from skewed growth, thus increasing the resentment of those left behind.
The opportunity to “throw the rascals out” in each election cycle helps to let off some steam, but it does not resolve the problems that are generating it.
It is difficult to predict what triggers popular protest, but economic factors are key.
For example, rising food prices tend to hurt the poor, especially the urban poor, who spend a large share of their income on food; unlike agricultural workers, they receive none of the benefits of higher food prices.
With swelling urban populations, it will become increasingly difficult to keep a lid on these pressures.
Some governments have reacted to recent events with political repression, information blackouts, or a combination of authoritarian measures.
China, for example, blocked media coverage of the Egyptian protests.
The Arab Spring, however, reveals the fragility of repressive political regimes that try to maintain their legitimacy by limiting information flows.
The main lesson for dynamic emerging-market countries is that an exclusive focus on GDP growth may ultimately not be good for economic and political stability.
Even with rapid increases in national income, if these countries’ leaders do not distribute the benefits fairly, they will become vulnerable to popular discontent.
Tackling corruption is critical to improving long-term growth and maintaining social stability.
These economies need measures that help to keep the poor out of poverty traps, and that give them realistic opportunities to improve their economic well-being.
Such steps include broadening financial markets to give more people access to credit and investment, strengthening social safety nets to protect the economically vulnerable, and improving educational access and quality.
These lessons apply equally to advanced economies, which also suffer from rising inequality and subtle forms of corruption.
But, for those wealthy economies, restoring decent growth is now the major priority.
Emerging markets have a golden opportunity to build on their economic gains and lock in growth and stability by tackling deep-seated problems like corruption.
As the past year’s events have shown, the costs of inaction could be calamitous.
These are all very important issues.
But the mere figures are simply not enough. A different approach to the problem of climate change is needed.
The climate issue can only be solved on the basis of shared, deeply felt ethical principles.
Humanity has reached a critical moment in Earth’s history, at which peoples and nations will have to recognize their solidarity – with each other and with the Earth – and start acting upon it.
Similar to the way world leaders adopted the United Nations Millennium Declaration in September 2000, and embraced the resulting Millennium Development Goals, today’s climate negotiators will have to commit themselves to creating a basis of shared fundamental ethical principles.
Such a basis is not hard to find.
Its inspiration can be the Earth Charter, which, launched in 2000, was initiated by, among others, former USSR President Mikhail Gorbachev and Wangari Mathaai, who received the 2004 Nobel Peace Prize for her efforts in the Green Belt Movement, a pan-African tree-planting initiative.
The climate problem does not stop at borders.
In the next few decades, a low-lying country like the Netherlands will need to invest billions of euros to intensify its age-old struggle against rising water.
But in many other countries, the water is already flooding over the dikes, both literally and figuratively.
Climate change affects particularly those countries that lack the money needed to take adequate measures against rising sea levels, persistent droughts, or devastating storms, even though they had nothing to do with the primary cause of these problems – industrialization in the developed countries.
Apart from the necessary, often infrastructural adaptations to survive the effects of climate change, enormous efforts to prevent even worse things from happening are required.
Large investments in forestation, agriculture, and energy supply are called for.
In devising solutions, the role of women should be the main focus.
Women are often the first people who have to address the problem of gaining access to natural resources, and they are capable of playing a major role as pioneers in finding solutions to climate change and the way humankind should adapt to it.
In the short term, the world should become a sustainable global society of low CO2 emitters.
This is a mission for all humankind, in which patriotic feelings and thinking in terms of power blocs have no place.
The pursuit of a sustainable global society of low CO2 emitters requires a tremendous effort.
Precisely for this reason, it also requires a broadly shared ethical basis.
This would guide the negotiating parties in such a way that they look not only for solutions to a part of the problem, but first and foremost at a comprehensive solution to the entire problem.
The climate change issue is too important to be left in the care of politicians.
In Copenhagen, it is therefore imperative that not only nation states, but the business community and citizens combine their efforts to save our planet’s climate. That is not only a scientific necessity; it is an ethical imperative.
A Communist Party without Communism
PRINCETON – Russian President Vladimir Putin’s anointment of Alexander Medvedev to succeed him in what is supposed to be a democratic presidential election next March shows that Russia’s leaders have not changed a whit.
It looks increasingly likely that, as under Leonid Brezhnev, we will see the same names in the news for decades to come.
According to Gleb Pavlovsky, the Putin regime’s leading ideologist, the current Russian system is perfect in all respects but one: it doesn’t know its enemies.
Indeed, it seems as if everyone in the Kremlin is reading Carl Schmitt, the Nazi legal theorist who taught that naming your enemy is the central mission of politics.
In the spirit of Schmitt, Putin’s men designated a liberal party, the Union of Right Forces, as their ur-enemy.
Its public meetings were broken up by armed police; its leaders arrested and beaten; Putin called its supporters “coyotes.”
What is surprising is that this aggressive behavior occurred in response to no visible danger.
Oil prices are soaring, as are Putin’s approval ratings.
His appointees control everything that matters, from Gazprom to the Central Electoral Committee.
Since the pacification of Chechnya with violence and subsidies, the incarceration or emigration of a few financially viable opponents, and the massive “social investments” of recent years, which, under Medvedev’s personal supervision, have bribed the population, no credible force can seriously challenge Putin’s men.
Yet their regime is in crisis, and they know it.
Russia’s economy is more dependent on gas and oil than ever before.
Military reform has been reversed.
Despite increasing incomes, Russians are less educated and less healthy than they were when Putin came to power; they still die at a shockingly young age.
Russian involvement in world affairs is tainted by poison and corruption.
State monopolies undo what private businesses created.
With more money, ill-educated bureaucrats hire more ill-educated bureaucrats; as a result, the regime fails to rule the country.
The country is unruly, and its rulers know it.
So they panic.
Putin’s aim was to subject all power to the control of Russia’s security forces.
His generation of KGB officers watched the collapse of the Communist Party and all the governmental bodies that it “directed and controlled,” including the KGB.
Under Putin, the security service has had its revenge.
Its people have become powerful, arrogant, and enormously rich.
They have also become disobedient.
In 2004, General Viktor Cherkesov, then Putin’s representative in northwest Russia, published an essay that glorified the KGB as the only unspoiled authority in a corrupted country.
This essay, more than anything else, defined Putin’s second term.
In October 2007, Cherkesov (now chief of one of the most obscure and powerful services, the Federal Anti-Drug Administration) published another essay in which he lamented his colleagues’ degradation: warriors had turned into traders, he complained.
Earlier, generals from a competing service, the FSB, had arrested Cherkesov’s deputy for “illegal bugging.”
In a public gesture of despair, Cherkesov admitted the failure of Putin’s project to reanimate Russian governance by subordinating it to the security services.
Cherkesov’s deputy remains in prison.
Most believe that Putin is unable to intervene in his defense.
In the absence of Communist Party control, these security officers betrayed their corporate ethic and engaged in horse-trading, applying force when a trade did not go well.
That this happens to ordinary Russians is clear; what Cherkesov revealed was that Putin’s circle also confronts this situation.
What is to be done when ex-KGB warriors turn their swords and bugs against one another?
Cherkesov’s case exemplifies Putin’s nightmare.
But if your instincts betray you, you go back to even deeper ones.
Now that Putin’s people have left their predecessors’ neo-liberal ideas behind and feel disenchanted with the ex-KGB clique, the task is to recreate an omnipresent political party that controls the security services, the administration, business, and much else.
This party will be centralized under personal leadership and will reduce the state to a legal fiction.
Preaching nationalism, its managers will believe in their universal competence, as opposed to KGB-style professionalism and corporatism.
Boris Yeltsin forbade party cells in state-controlled institutions by decree.
Putin’s lawyers will reverse that decision; the party will have cells or committees in every factory, corporation, military unit, university department, etc.
Integrated by the leader’s charisma and party discipline, party members will direct and unify the desolated country.
This is Putin’s plan.
Like former Soviet leader Yuri Andropov, the only other KGB man to rule Russia, Putin will become the party’s general secretary.
As in the Soviet era, state and governmental officials will be reduced to party ciphers – the role that President Medvedev will play under General Secretary Putin.
And, of course, being General Secretary carries no constitutional term limit.
In the end, Putin has what history left him: not ideas, just a faction yearning to consolidate its grip on power.
Lenin and Trotsky needed a party to make their ideology a reality; Putin and Medvedev are devising an ideology to solidify their party.
It is a bizarre ideology.
Accusing warriors of being traders and traders of being thieves, it shuns its Marxist origins.
It will subordinate all who really do work – traders, warriors, journalists, and others – to party ideologues whose sole job is to search for enemies.
A Confederal Solution for Palestine
LONDON – Last month, while in New York City, I happened to be staying in the same hotel as Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu.
To accommodate his security needs, the hotel had been converted into a fortress, much like Israel itself.
Netanyahu was in the United States for yet another round of Middle East peace talks.
The US offered various sweeteners to induce Israel to freeze its West Bank settlement construction for another 90 days.
The Israelis refused; another impasse was reached.
What, then, might be the prospects of a negotiated peace between two peoples with claims to the same land?
The answer is: very poor.
All peace efforts since the Oslo accords of 1993 have been based on the “two-state solution,” according to which Israel is supposed to turn over the occupied territories to a Palestinian state, the Palestinians are supposed to renounce any claims on the Jewish state, and everyone is supposed to live happily ever after.
A negotiated “land for peace” solution still remains official Western doctrine.
As US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton put it in a recent speech, “a just, lasting, and comprehensive peace” has to be based on “two states for two peoples.”
Meanwhile, the two main parties to the dispute, Palestine and Israel, are searching for unilateral alternatives to the stymied “peace process.”
The Palestinians are pushing for international recognition of their statehood, while the Israelis are using their settlement policy to preempt a Palestinian state.
Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas has said that, if the latest peace talks collapse, he will press for UN recognition of a Palestinian state based on the 1967 borders.
This month, Brazil and Argentina recognized “Palestine,” and a cascade of Latin American countries is expected to follow.
Abbas is now setting his sights on Europe, and would ask Turkey to serve as a go-between.
The game is to use international recognition of an independent Palestinian state to pressure the US to retreat from its almost unconditional support for Israeli policy.
Israel’s main concern continues to be security.
The official Western doctrine is that Israel’s long-term security depends on the success of the “peace process.”
In practice, Israel has been taking other measures to secure its future.
Media attention has been focused on the “security wall,” which has certainly succeeded in reducing the level of violence.
But, to the hawks who now control Israeli politics, the key to Israel’s security depends on depth of defense, for which expansion of the settlements is indispensable.
The hawks’ recipe for survival is threefold: continued military and economic support from the US, defensible frontiers through a strategic settlement program, and the carve-up of the Palestinian West Bank into disconnected bantustans, or subordinate authorities, incapable of concerted opposition to Israeli policy.
Thus, while Abbas seeks to create a new “fact on the ground” by drumming up international support for a Palestinian state, Israel aims to trump him by making such a state unviable.
The ideal alternative to both strategies is a peace process that aims not to create two states, but rather to establish the political and economic basis for a single confederal state.
Indeed, the two-state solution was always an illusion.
There was never enough land to satisfy the passionate possessiveness of all those with claims to it.
And, over time, Israeli settler disengagement from the West Bank and East Jerusalem has become just as impossible as any attempt by Israel to expel its remaining Arabs.
Israeli Jews are bound to stay in the West Bank and East Jerusalem, and Israeli Arabs are bound to stay in Israel proper.
These are the “facts on the ground” that doom Palestinian hopes for a sovereign Palestinian state no less than Israeli hopes for a wholly Jewish state.
Moreover, land for peace never made sense from an economic point of view.
If compensation for wrongs to the Palestinians was to be the guiding principle, there were always better ways of going about it than to found a rickety, poverty-ridden new country dependent on foreign aid.
Most people have forgotten that the Paris Protocols of April 1994 established a customs union between Israel and the occupied territories, with a joint Economic Council to adjudicate trade disputes.
The free movement of goods, labor, and capital between the two parts could have given a tremendous economic boost to Palestinian GDP.
It could also have been the basis of a confederal state, whose Palestinian part would have benefited from the West Bank settlers’ productivity and taxes.
But this benign prospect was undermined by the violence needed to maintain the Jewish state and enable the emergence of a Palestinian one.
The official view remains that only an internationally guaranteed two-state settlement will bring about the security needed for the economic revival of the Palestinian territories.
But it is just possible that unilateral Israeli policy, implicitly backed by the US, will create interim conditions of peace that are sufficient for economic growth to cool Palestinian nationalism.
The Palestinian cause is not the overriding preoccupation of even the Arab states, so Netanyahu’s strategy of defense in depth stands a better chance of success than Abbas’s pursuit of statehood through international recognition.
Netanyahu’s project is not moral.
But that doesn’t mean that it won’t work, at least for a time.
A Confederation for Kosovo
Time is running out in Kosovo.
If a United Nations-backed settlement is not reached by early December, the province’s majority Albanian population is likely to declare independence unilaterally – a move that the United States has announced it may support.
That would be a disastrous step.
Russia would be furious, because it fears that Kosovo’s secession – whether or not it is internationally recognized – might fuel separatist movements in the former Soviet empire.
Serbia is even more strongly opposed.
Dusan Prorokovic, Serbia’s state secretary for Kosovo, has said that his country might use force to maintain its sovereignty.
Even if the government hesitates, ultranationalist groups might push Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica to send in troops: the current UN presence in Kosovo is very thin (only 40 “military observers” and 2,116 policemen) but the stationing of 15,000 NATO troops could make any armed clash very dangerous.
After eight years of international administration, Kosovo’s Albanian majority has tasted freedom and is eager for full independence.
But Serbia claims that the province remains an essential part of its historical and cultural tradition.
Moreover, independence would not be accepted by the Serbian public, which has already watched in dismay as “Great Serbia” has been gradually whittled away, most recently with the secession of Montenegro.
Serbia is prepared to concede only “enhanced autonomy” to Kosovo, and some capacity to enter into international agreements.
Yet, while the two parties now seem irreconcilable, it is not too late for compromise.
But this is possible only by resuscitating – and updating – an old institution of the international community: a confederation of states.
By means of a binding UN Security Council resolution, Kosovo could be granted full and exclusive authority over its citizens and territory, as well as limited capacity for action on the international scene.
It could be authorized to enter into trade agreements as well as agreements concerning individuals (for example, admission and circulation of foreigners, or extradition), plus the right to seek admission to the UN (which does not require full sovereignty and independence).
Kosovo would thus gain some essential trappings of statehood.
However, a decision-making body consisting of delegates from Kosovo, Serbia, and the European Union would be given full authority over major foreign policy issues (for example, alliances and relations with international economic institutions), defence, borders (in case Kosovo wished to join with Albania), and the treatment of Kosovo’s Serbian minority.
As a result, Kosovo and Serbia would constitute two distinct international subjects, bound by a confederation hinging on a common decision-making body.
Of course, this confederation would be asymmetrical, because the Serbian government’s sovereignty over the rest of Serbia would remain intact and unlimited, whereas the Kosovar government’s “sovereignty” over Kosovo would be restrained.
To avoid one of the two parties getting the upper hand and imposing arbitrary decisions, the common decision-making body should consist of four Serbian delegates, two Kosovar delegates, and three representatives of the EU, thus requiring both sides to gain the support of the European delegates.
In addition, the EU should create a small but effective military force (say, 5,000 troops) to back up the common body’s decisions.
As with any compromise, the contending parties would both gain and lose from this arrangement.
Serbia would save face, and would continue to have a say on crucial matters concerning Kosovo, including the treatment of the Serbian minority.
Kosovo would acquire limited independence, with its status rising from a province of a sovereign state to an international subject capable of entering into certain agreements with other states and even joining the UN.
The EU would benefit as well, by contributing to the stabilization of a highly volatile area.
Subsequently, the EU would monitor Kosovo and prevent any dispute that might turn violent.
A final advantage of this solution is that it would be temporary.
Historically, confederations sooner or later either become federations (as occurred in the US, Germany, and Switzerland) or, pushed by centrifugal forces, split up (as with the United Arab Republic, established in 1958, which split three years later into Egypt and Syria).
The confederation I advocate would thus constitute an intermediate stage (lasting five or ten years), at the end of which Kosovo is likely to become fully independent.
Delaying a final solution in this way would provide time to verify Kosovo’s prospects of joining the EU and thus eventually sharing “sovereign authority” with other independent states, which could deflate Kosovars’ dangerously robust nationalistic demands.
A Cool Calculus of Global Warming
The British government recently issued the most comprehensive study to date of the economic costs and risks of global warming, and of measures that might reduce greenhouse gas emissions, in the hope of averting some of the direst consequences.
Written under the leadership of Sir Nicholas Stern of the London School of Economics, who succeeded me as Chief Economist of the World Bank, the report makes clear that the question is no longer whether we can afford to do anything about global warming, but whether we can afford not to.
The report proposes an agenda whose cost would be equivalent to just 1% of annual consumption, but would save the world risk equivalent costs that are five times greater.
The reported costs of global warming are higher than in earlier studies because it takes into account the mounting evidence that the process of global warming is highly complex and non-linear, with a non-negligible chance that it may proceed much faster than had previously been thought and that the extent of warming may be much greater than had previously been thought.
Indeed, the study may actually significantly underestimate the costs: for instance, climate change may lead to more weather variability, a possible disappearance or major shift of the Gulf Stream – of particular concern to Europe – and a flourishing of disease.
When I served in 1995 on the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the scientific group that periodically assesses the science of global warming, there was overwhelming evidence that the concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere had increased markedly since the beginning of the industrial revolution, that human activity had contributed significantly to those increases, and that they would have profound effects on climate and sea levels.
But few saw, for instance, the Artic ice cap melting as rapidly as now seems to be the case.
Still, some suggest that because we are not certain about how bad global warming will be, we should do little or nothing.
To me, uncertainty should make us act more resolutely today, not less.
As one scientist friend puts it: if you are driving on a mountain road, approaching a cliff, in a car whose brakes may fail, and a fog bank rolls in, should you drive more or less cautiously?
Global warming is one of those rare instances where the scientific community is more fearful of what may be happening than the population at large.
Scientists have glimpsed what the future may portend.
As the Stern report points out, as usual, the poor are the most vulnerable.
A third of Bangladesh will be underwater by the end of this century.
The Maldives and a host of Pacific Island states will disappear: our twenty-first-century Atlantis.
To an economist, the problem is obvious: polluters are not paying the full costs of the damage they cause.
Pollution is a global externality of enormous proportions.
The advanced countries might mean Bangladesh and the disappearing island states no harm, but no war could be more devastating.
A global externality can best be dealt with by a globally agreed tax rate.
This does not mean an increase in overall taxation, but simply a substitution in each country of a pollution (carbon) tax for some current taxes.
It makes much more sense to tax things that are bad, like pollution, than things that are good, like savings and work.
Although President George W. Bush says he believes in markets, in this case he has called for voluntary action.
But it makes far more sense to use the force of markets – the power of incentives – than to rely on goodwill, especially when it comes to oil companies that regard their sole objective as maximizing profits, regardless of the cost to others.
Exxon has reportedly been funding so-called think tanks to undermine confidence in the science of global warming, just as the tobacco industry funded “research” to question the validity of statistical findings showing the link between smoking and cancer.
Some companies even seem to celebrate the melting of the polar ice cap, because it will reduce the cost of extracting the oil that lies beneath the Arctic Ocean.
The good news is that there are many ways by which improved incentives could reduce emissions – partly by eliminating the myriad of subsidies for inefficient usages.
The US subsidizes corn-based ethanol, and imposes tariffs on sugar-based ethanol; hidden in the tax code are billions of dollars of subsidies to the oil and gas industries.
Most importantly, price signals that show the true social costs of energy derived from fossil fuels will encourage innovation and conservation.
Small changes in practices, when replicated by hundreds of millions of people, can make an enormous difference.
For example, simply changing the color of roofs in warm climates to reflect sunlight or planting trees around houses can lead to great savings on energy used for air conditioning.
We have but one planet, and should treasure it.
Global warming is a risk that we simply cannot afford to ignore anymore.
A Cool Head for the Hottest Issues
LONDON – Reading Barack Obama’s Dreams from My Father , the US president’s beautifully written reflections on his early life and identity, most people are struck by his cool and intellectual approach.
This is not to say that he is unemotional.
Obama can rage and weep.
But he rarely seems to act on the basis of raw sentiment or instinctive prejudice.
Pragmatic and highly intelligent, sooner or later every issue receives the full attention of his forensic curiosity.
Recalling Hillary Clinton’s famous Democratic primary television advertisement, Obama, it turns out, is exactly the sort of president that most of us would want to have in the post for that 3 a.m. phone call about an international crisis.
He would not be afraid to act, but he would be prepared to think first.
I do not think, therefore, that Obama will be too vexed by some of the criticism he faces at the end of his first year in office, though he will undoubtedly grimace at the defeat of the Democratic candidate in the special election in Massachusetts to fill Ted Kennedy’s old seat.
Obama was praised extravagantly a year ago; 12 months on, the criticism is over the top, too.
Obama inherited a terrible legacy – recession, financial meltdown, Iraq, Afghanistan. He has not solved all of these problems.
But it is difficult to see any really bad mistakes, except perhaps allowing himself to be pushed around by Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu and giving China the impression that he was prepared for a bilateral relationship entirely on China’s terms.
That seems to be changing now.
Obama may have come to understand that when you are the leader of the world’s only superpower, you need to be feared just a little if you are to be respected.
The left in America criticizes Obama for not turning the economy around already.
The right angrily denounces him as a crypto-communist because he wants every American to have health care.
With a dispassionate eye on the long game, what will the president himself be thinking?
Yet there are still 23,000 nuclear warheads on our planet, with the explosive power of 150,000 Hiroshima bombs.
Terrorist groups would undoubtedly like to get their hands on one.
In all, there are eight nuclear-weapon states – the US, Russia, Britain, France, China, Israel, India, and Pakistan.
North Korea may also have a few bombs. Iran is believed by many to be trying to develop one.
Other states, which have their own civil nuclear capacity, have the potential to develop a weapon. The number of countries in this category is bound to increase as the number of nuclear power reactors doubles over the next 20 years.
The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) has contained the number of nuclear states.
A conference is to be held in May to renew and review it.
Obama clearly recognizes that the NPT needs to be strengthened in order to prevent countries from turning their civil nuclear-power capacity into weapons.
But Obama also knows that if the existing nuclear states want others to accept tougher restrictions, they will have to cut back their nuclear arsenals. This is principally an issue for the US and Russia, which possess 95% of the world’s nuclear weapons.
In addition, it would help if the US could take a strong lead by ratifying the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
The nuclear issue is one of the biggest items on the Obama agenda. How it is handled will help to define his presidency.
Even before the talking gets serious in May, there will be the question of Iran to sort out.
Iran says that it seeks no more than its own ability to produce nuclear power.
Disbelief grows with every revelation of secret Iranian facilities and plans, and with every refusal by Iran to negotiate safeguards that would allow for civil use while preventing weaponization.
The US, the European Union, and Russia have tried to engage Iran on this issue, so far without success.
China seems likely to block effective sanctions on Iran because of its close energy relationship with the country.
How China eventually handles this will profoundly affect its standing in the US and Europe.
These are going to be some of the major questions for Obama over the next year and more.
If he gets them right, he can forget about his short-term critics.
Fortunately, he is smart enough to know this.
A Crisis in Full Flight
MUNICH – For a while, it looked as if the European Central Bank’s €1 trillion credit program to pump liquidity into Europe’s banking system had calmed global financial markets.
But now interest rates for Italian and Spanish government bonds are on the rise again, closing in on about 6%.
Of course, this may not be the breaking point beyond which the debt burden becomes unsustainable.
After all, interest rates in Southern Europe were well above 10% in the decade before the euro was introduced.
Even Germany at that time had to pay bondholders more than 6%.
Nevertheless, the markets are clearly signaling growing doubt about whether Spain and Italy will be willing to bear their debt burden.
The main problem is Spain, where private and public-sector foreign debt is larger than that of Greece, Portugal, Ireland, and Italy combined, and, as in Greece, is in the neighborhood of 100% of GDP (93% to be precise).
A quarter of the labor force and half of Spain’s youth are unemployed, reflecting the country’s loss of competitiveness in the wake of the real-estate bubble inflated by cheap euro credit in the pre-crisis period.
The current-account deficit remains at 3.5% of GDP, despite the recession-induced decline in imports, while economic contraction will cause Spain to miss its budget-deficit target again.
Moreover, Spain’s debt with the ECB’s TARGET settlement system rose by €55 billion ($72 billion) between February and March, because capital outflows of that amount had to be compensated.
Since July 2011, Spain’s TARGET debt has grown by €199 billion.
Capital is in full flight, more than offsetting the inflows from 2008-2010.
The cumulative total since the beginning of the first crisis year (2008) means that Spain has financed its entire current-account deficit via the printing press.
The picture is little better in Italy, where the current-account balance has swung from a surplus of around 2% of GDP to a 3%-of-GDP deficit over the last ten years.
The country’s TARGET debt grew by €76 billion from February to March, with the total since July 2011 reaching €276 billion.
Italy, too, is being drained of capital; in fact, the flight of investors accelerated after the ECB’s liquidity injection.
It is now clear that the ECB itself has caused a large part of the capital flight from countries like Spain and Italy, because the cheap credit that it offered drove away private capital.
The purpose of the ECB’s measures was to re-establish confidence and bring about a recovery of the inter-bank market.
In this, too, it has not really been successful, despite the huge amount of money that it put on the table.
Indeed, now the French are looking wobbly.
As capital fled the country between July 2011 and January 2012, France’s TARGET debt increased by €95 billion.
France, too, has become uncompetitive, owing to the cheap credit brought by the euro in its initial years.
According to a recent study by Goldman Sachs, the country’s price level must drop by an estimated 20% vis-à-vis the euro average – that is, depreciate in real terms – if the economy is to regain competitiveness within the eurozone.
Italy will have to depreciate by 10-15%, and Spain by roughly 20%.
While Greece and Portugal face the need for deflation totaling 30% and 35%, respectively, the figures for Spain and Italy are high enough to justify fears about the future development of the eurozone.
These imbalances can be redressed only with great effort, if at all, and only if one accepts a decade of stagnation.
For Greece and Portugal, staying in the eurozone will be a tight squeeze.
There are many who would solve the problem by routing more and more cheap credit through public channels – bailout funds, eurobonds, or the ECB – from the eurozone’s healthy core to the troubled South.
But this would unfairly force savers and taxpayers in the core countries to provide capital to the South on terms to which they would never voluntarily agree.
Already German, Dutch, and Finish savings amounting to €15,000, €17,000, and €21,000, respectively, per working person have been converted from marketable investments into mere equalization claims against the ECB.
No one knows what these claims will be worth in the event of a eurozone breakup.
Above all, however, the permanent public provision of cheap credit would ultimately lead to a lingering infirmity, if not to Europe’s economic collapse, because the eurozone would become a central management system with state control over investment.
Such systems cannot work, because they eliminate the capital market as the economic system’s main steering mechanism.
One cannot help but wonder how thoughtlessly Europe’s politicians have started down this slippery slope.
A Crisis in Two Narratives
CHICAGO – With the world’s industrial democracies in crisis, two competing narratives of its sources – and appropriate remedies – are emerging.
The first, better-known diagnosis is that demand has collapsed because of high debt accumulated prior to the crisis.
Households (and countries) that were most prone to spend cannot borrow any more.
To revive growth, others must be encouraged to spend – governments that can still borrow should run larger deficits, and rock-bottom interest rates should discourage thrifty households from saving.
Under these circumstances, budgetary recklessness is a virtue, at least in the short term.
In the medium term, once growth revives, debt can be paid down and the financial sector curbed so that it does not inflict another crisis on the world.
This narrative – the standard Keynesian line, modified for a debt crisis – is the one to which most government officials, central bankers, and Wall Street economists have subscribed, and needs little elaboration.
Its virtue is that it gives policymakers something clear to do, with promised returns that match the political cycle.
Unfortunately, despite past stimulus, growth is still tepid, and it is increasingly difficult to find sensible new spending that can pay off in the short run.
Attention is therefore shifting to the second narrative, which suggests that the advanced economies’ fundamental capacity to grow by making useful things has been declining for decades, a trend that was masked by debt-fueled spending.
More such spending will not return these countries to a sustainable growth path.
Instead, they must improve the environment for growth.
The second narrative starts with the 1950’s and 1960’s, an era of rapid growth in the West and Japan.
Several factors, including post-war reconstruction, the resurgence of trade after the protectionist 1930’s, the introduction of new technologies in power, transport, and communications across countries, and expansion of educational attainment, underpinned the long boom.
But, as Tyler Cowen has argued in his book The Great Stagnation, once these “low-hanging fruit” were plucked, it became much harder to propel growth from the 1970’s onward.
Meanwhile, as Wolfgang Streeck writes persuasively in New Left Review, democratic governments, facing what seemed, in the 1960’s, like an endless vista of innovation and growth, were quick to expand the welfare state.
But, when growth faltered, this meant that government spending expanded, even as its resources shrank.
For a while, central banks accommodated that spending.
The resulting high inflation created widespread discontent, especially because little growth resulted.
Faith in Keynesian stimulus diminished, though high inflation did reduce public-debt levels.
Central banks then began to focus on low and stable inflation as their primary objective, and became more independent from their political masters.
But deficit spending by governments continued apace, and public debt as a share of GDP in industrial countries climbed steadily from the late 1970’s, this time without inflation to reduce its real value.
Recognizing the need to find new sources of growth, towards the end of Jimmy Carter’s presidency, and then under Ronald Reagan, the United States deregulated industry and the financial sector, as did Margaret Thatcher in the United Kingdom.
Productivity growth increased substantially in these countries over time, which persuaded Continental Europe to adopt reforms of its own, often pushed by the European Commission.
Yet even this growth was not enough, given previous governments’ generous promises of health care and pensions – promises made even less tenable by rising life expectancy and falling birth rates.
Public debt continued to grow.
And the incomes of the moderately educated middle class failed to benefit from deregulation-led growth (though it improved their lot as consumers).
The most recent phase of the advanced economies’ frenzied search for growth took different forms.
In some countries, most notably the US, a private-sector credit boom created jobs in low-skilled industries like construction, and precipitated a consumption boom as people borrowed against overvalued houses.
In other countries, like Greece, as well as under regional administrations in Italy and Spain, a government-led hiring spree created secure jobs for the moderately educated.
In this “fundamental” narrative, the advanced countries’ pre-crisis GDP was unsustainable, bolstered by borrowing and unproductive make-work jobs.
More borrowed growth – the Keynesian formula – may create the illusion of normalcy, and may be useful in the immediate aftermath of a deep crisis to calm a panic, but it is no solution to a fundamental growth problem.
If this diagnosis is correct, advanced countries need to focus on reviving innovation and productivity growth over the medium term, and on realigning welfare promises with revenue capacity, while alleviating the pain of the truly destitute in the short run.
For example, Southern Europe’s growth potential may consist in deregulating service sectors and reducing employment protection to spur creation of more private-sector jobs for retrenched government workers and unemployed youth.
In the US, the imperative is to improve the match between potential jobs and worker skills.
People understand better than the government what they need and are acting accordingly.
Many women, for example, are leaving low-paying jobs to acquire skills that will open doors to higher-paying positions.
Too little government attention has been focused on such issues, partly because payoffs occur beyond electoral horizons, and partly because the effectiveness of government programs has been mixed.
Tax reform, however, can provide spur retraining and maintain incentives to work, even while fixing gaping fiscal holes.
Three powerful forces, one hopes, will help to create more productive jobs in the future: better use of information and communications technology (and new ways to make it pay), lower-cost energy as alternative sources are harnessed, and sharply rising demand in emerging markets for higher-value-added goods.
The advanced countries have a choice.
They can act as if all is well, except that their consumers are in a funk, and that “animal spirits” must be revived through stimulus.
Or they can treat the crisis as a wake-up call to fix what debt has papered over in the last few decades.
For better or worse, the narrative that persuades these countries’ governments and publics will determine their future –&nbsp;and that of the global economy.
Financing the Next Development Agenda
WASHINGTON, DC – As the 2015 target date for the Millennium Development Goals approaches, the United Nations is intensifying its efforts to foster debate about what comes next for promotion of development worldwide.
The outcome of these discussions will shape policies and investment aimed at spurring GDP growth, strengthening human capital, and promoting more inclusive prosperity.
With the global population expected to reach nine billion people by 2050 – a significant proportion of whom will reside in developing or underdeveloped countries – the international community must improve access to education, health care, and employment opportunities worldwide.
Meanwhile, the prospect of a rise in global temperature of more than 2°C (3.6°F) over pre-industrial levels by the end of this century (which would trigger global warming’s most damaging effects) calls for higher investment in sustainable urbanization, climate-smart agriculture, and social safety nets.
Both factors challenge us to define, in the longer term, more sustainable patterns of production and consumption.
Governments, civil society, and the private sector must rise to the challenge, cooperating to find and implement creative solutions.
But, first, they must anticipate the associated financing requirements, which will soon surpass the current capacities of governments and international donors, and take action now to activate new, reliable sources of financing.
To start, governments should design targeted, evidence-based policies and support the development of sound institutions.
This would make government services more effective, while helping to catalyze additional development aid from traditional donors and mobilize private-sector resources.
In many countries, there is considerable scope for domestic resource mobilization.
Broadening the tax base, improving tax administration, and closing gaps in the value-added tax could make a significant difference in lower-income countries, where tax revenues account for only about 10-14% of GDP, compared to 20-30% of GDP in high-income countries.
More equitable taxation would have a positive impact on governance, another important tool for mobilizing domestic resources.
With improved corporate and public governance and clear transfer-pricing policies, resource-rich countries could shore up their capacity to negotiate fair contracts with extractive industries, balance revenues and expenditures over time, and manage their natural endowments more transparently.
Progress in these areas would help governments to channel their spending more effectively toward those who would benefit the most.
For example, only 8% of the $409 billion spent on fossil-fuel subsidies in 2010 reached the poorest 20% of the population.
A targeted support program could increase substantially the efficiency of spending, freeing up resources for education, health, and poverty eradication.
Furthermore, promoting financial deepening and inclusiveness could accelerate private-sector growth, creating more opportunities.
Indeed, broader access to financial services would help the estimated 400 million micro, small, and medium-size enterprises in developing countries to prosper, while enabling the 2.5 billion people worldwide who currently lack access to such services to build their assets.
A deeper and more efficient financial sector would also reduce transaction costs and facilitate risk management.
Local-currency bond markets could help to develop domestic investor bases and mobilize domestic savings to support long-term investments.
At the same time, the international community should work to improve the availability and effectiveness of official development assistance.
The ODA target of 0.7% of GDP – agreed in 2002 at the International Conference on Financing for Development in Monterrey, Mexico – should motivate countries to increase their contributions.
They can also take steps to make ODA more predictable from year to year.
Donors should structure aid to ensure that it supports sound national development policies and programs, rather than their own narrow interests.
This is particularly relevant as emerging development partners, especially the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa), offer new kinds of aid packages that incorporate investment and non-financial assistance.
Private charities, which have been instrumental in promoting innovation in fields such as health care, the environment, and education, could provide valuable insight into channeling aid more effectively.
More generally, improving coordination among donors would help to maximize the impact of aid on the ground.
While ODA remains an important source of financing for fragile and very-low-income countries, it represents only 7% of net financial flows to developing countries, where foreign direct investment, remittances, long-term debt, and portfolio investment have a larger impact.
Donors should leverage aid to “grow the pie” and to diversify financing sources for the world’s poorest countries by providing risk guarantees, innovative investment vehicles, debt syndication, and co-financing arrangements.
Attracting even a fraction of the assets held by institutional investors, sovereign-wealth funds, and public pension funds could boost development finance substantially.
Diaspora populations are another major potential source of development financing.
Reducing transfer costs, which average an estimated 9% of the value of transactions, would put more money into the hands of those who need it most.
Tailoring financial products for diaspora communities could attract resources for investment, while reinforcing migrants’ ties – economic and otherwise – to their home countries.
Finally, the international community bears a special responsibility for delivering global public goods.
The responsibility to preserve the environment, stem the spread of communicable diseases, strengthen the international financial architecture, enhance developing-country participation in the global trading system, and facilitate the exchange of knowledge lies at the intersection of national development priorities and global interests.
Duty-free, quota-free access to OECD markets, complemented by simpler, more transparent rules of origin, would raise GDP by 1% in the least-developed countries, lifting millions out of poverty.
Investment in statistical capacity would help governments and businesses worldwide to make better policy decisions, based on a more accurate accounting of the associated costs and benefits.
The challenge of the post-2015 development agenda lies in finding creative solutions to support prosperity, equality, and sustainability.
Together, governments, civil society, international organizations, and the private sector can improve the availability and quality of finance for development, and shape a better future for all.
A Czech Moment
PRAGUE – As I listened to what some Europeans were saying as my country prepared to take over the presidency of the European Union, I heard dim echoes of Neville Chamberlain’s infamous description of Czechoslovakia as “a faraway country of which we know little.”
I suppose that Donald Rumsfeld’s misguided bid a few years ago to incite a divide between “new and old” Europe contributed to the re-emergence of that disdainful attitude. 
The reality is that there is no such thing as “old and new” Europe, and there never was.
The break with communism and reunification of Europe is now almost two decades old.
We Czechs are 100% European, and were even when the Iron Curtain cut us off from democratic Europe.
Indeed, our pro-EU sentiments may be all the stronger because our membership in the Union, like our freedom, is so comparatively new.
So no one in Europe needs to fear that the Czech Republic has some nostalgic or idiosyncratic agenda that it wants to impose on the Union.
On the contrary, events have imposed an agenda on Europe that we cannot escape and for which solidarity – true union – will be needed.
The primary, and most pressing, of the problems we face is the financial and economic crisis that is enveloping the EU.
Unfortunately, conditions across the Union will likely worsen before they begin to improve.
The type of social unrest recently witnessed in Greece may spread, because the downturn is likely to take a disproportionate toll on Europe’s young people, who are seeking jobs at a time when hard-pressed European businesses will be able to offer them very few.
It will fall to the Union, once again, to help transform despair into hope.
We Czechs know something about this, as the wrenching economic transition that we underwent in the 1990’s taught us much about how the right policies can break the grip of hopelessness.
To contain today’s financial and economic crisis, Europe will also need to continue the cooperation that it has shown up to this point.
The very existence of our Union, and particularly of the euro, has already helped to prevent the competitive devaluations and beggar-thy-neighbor policies that ravaged Europe during the 1930’s – the last time the continent faced so brutal an economic downturn. 
But we cannot be complacent that the forces of national egoism will remain in check.
For now, EU governments’ coordinated fiscal stimulus has deprived populists of their usual charge that the EU is indifferent to the fate of individuals.
Even more policy coordination will be needed both to confront the crisis and to re-establish EU norms once the storm clouds begin to dissipate.
Although it is right that the Stability and Growth Pact has become more flexible in these extraordinary times, its rules did secure a successful first decade for the euro.
These rules must eventually be restored intact if Europe is to return to the path of sustainable growth, and a consensus will need to be forged now to make that happen.
The second key challenge that we will face during our European presidency is that of Russia.
A new Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (PCA) between the EU and the Russian Federation must be negotiated.
Those negotiations should have begun seriously last year, but the war in Georgia intervened to put them on hold.
Now those talks have resumed, but the background to the negotiations has changed dramatically.
Russia’s economy is now in far worse shape than that of EU members.
The collapse of world oil and gas prices has wounded Russia’s budget, and lack of investment in the country’s energy sector over the years is now causing the declining production that economists have long predicted.
Until now, Russia has cared less about a new PCA than the EU, because two-thirds of Russia’s exports to the Union comprise natural resources, which bring in cash even without the strong rules that a PCA provides.
Given the stark changes in economic conditions, however, it is now in Russia’s national interest to reassure international markets that it is a reliable place to do business, for which a new PCA would serve as an ideal signal.
Moreover, without a new PCA, individual European countries may feel it necessary to seek even more bilateral agreements with Russia.
Indeed, many EU members have been in a race with each other to see who will be Russia’s closest friend in the Union.
But the bilateral deals that have emerged from this race sometimes come at the expense of other Union members, and may unbalance relations within the Union as a whole.  Only a rules-based EU framework can provide a firm foundation for both bilateral and Union-wide relations with Russia. 
Europe’s main strength in foreign policy is not its commitment to a rules-based multilateralism, important as that undoubtedly is, but its unity.
When the Georgia crisis erupted, Europe united around a single position on Russia’s withdrawal.
It is the Czech Republic’s task, and that of the Swedish EU presidency that will follow our own, to maintain this unity as the PCA negotiations move forward.
During the 1990’s, the US and Europe erred in treating Russia with benign neglect.  It would be a mistake for Russia to respond in kind today by seeking to prolong the PCA negotiations in the hope that a possibly more amenable EU president may one day offer softer terms.
We, like all EU presidencies, will be representing the wider Union interests when we negotiate.
The Trade Delusion
LONDON – Since 2008, global trade has grown slightly more slowly than global GDP.
The Doha Round of World Trade Organization negotiations ended in failure.
Transatlantic and transpacific trade negotiations are progressing slowly, held back by the resistance of special interests.
But, though many experts fear that protectionism is undermining globalization, threatening to impede global economic growth, slower growth in global trade may be inevitable, and trade liberalization is decreasingly important.
To be sure, for 65 years, rapid trade growth has played a vital role in economic development, with average advanced-economy industrial tariffs plummeting from more than 30% to below 5%.
The creation of Europe’s single market facilitated increased intra-European trade.
Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan achieved rapid economic catch-up on the basis of export-led growth.
China has followed the same path over the last 30 years.
Trade grew about twice as fast as global output from 1990 to 2008.
But there is no reason why trade should grow faster than GDP forever.
Indeed, even if there were no trade barriers at all, trade might grow significantly more slowly than GDP in some periods.
Several factors make it possible that we are entering such a period.
For starters, there is the changing pattern of consumption in the advanced economies.
Richer people spend an increasing share of their income on services that are either impossible to trade (for example, restaurant meals) or difficult to trade (such as health services).
Non-tradable sectors tend to account for a growing share of employment and economic activity.
For several decades, that tendency has been offset by ever more intensive trading of tradable goods, often passing through many countries in complex supply chains.
In the future, however, the shift to non-tradable consumption may dominate.
Indeed, trade intensity may decline even for manufactured goods.
Trade is partly driven by differences in labor costs.
China’s dramatic manufacturing growth reflected low wages up to now.
But as real wages in China and other emerging economies grow, incentives for trade will decline.
The more that global incomes converge, the less trade there may be.
In addition, as the economists Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee of MIT have argued in their book The Second Machine Age, rapid advances in information technology may enable increasingly extensive automation.
Some manufacturing activities, though few jobs, may well return to developed countries, as the advantages of proximity to customers and lower transport costs outweigh decreasingly important differences in labor costs.
Global trade as a share of GDP may therefore decline, but without adverse consequences for global economic growth.
Rising productivity does not require relentlessly increasing trade intensity.
Earth, after all, does not trade with other planets, yet its economy still grows.
Optimal trade intensity depends on many factors – such as relative labor costs, transport costs, productivity levels, and economy-of-scale effects.
Trends in these factors might make reduced trade intensity not only inevitable but desirable.
Even if that is true, international trade will still play a vital role, and preventing any reversal of past trade liberalization is essential.
But further trade liberalization is bound to be of declining importance to economic growth.
With industrial tariffs already dramatically reduced most potential benefits of trade liberalization have already been grasped.
Estimates of the benefits of further trade liberalization are often surprisingly low – no more than a few percentage points of global GDP.
That is small compared to the cost of the 2008 financial crisis, which has left output in several advanced economies 10-15% below pre-crisis trend levels.
It is small, too, compared to the difference in economic performance between successful catch-up countries – such as China – and other countries that have enjoyed the same access to global markets but have performed less well for other reasons.
The main reason for slow progress in trade negotiations is not increasing protectionism; it is the fact that further liberalization entails complex trade-offs no longer offset by very large potential benefits.
The Doha Round’s failure has been decried as a setback for developing countries. And some liberalization – say, of advanced economies’ cotton imports – would undoubtedly benefit some low-income economies.
But full trade liberalization would have a complex impact on the least developed economies, some of which would benefit only if compensated for the loss of the preferential access to advanced-economy markets that they currently enjoy.
This implies that further progress in trade liberalization will be slow.
But slow progress is a far less important challenge to growth prospects than the debt overhang in developed economies, or infrastructure and educational deficiencies in many developing economies.
That reality often goes unacknowledged.
The importance of past trade liberalization has left the global policy establishment with a bias toward assuming that further liberalization would bring similar benefits.
But while the potential global benefits of trade liberalization have declined, reduced trade intensity might still impede economic development in some countries.
Only a handful of economies over the last 60 years have fully caught up to advanced-economy living standards, and all relied on export-led growth to drive productivity and job creation in manufacturing.
Relying solely on that model will be more difficult in the future.
China is so big that it must develop domestic drivers of growth at an earlier stage of development than did Japan, Taiwan, or South Korea; as a result, its exports will inevitably decline (relative to GDP).
Meanwhile, for some low-income countries, increased manufacturing and service-sector automation of the sort described by Brynjolfsson and McAfee, whether within advanced economies or within China’s established industrial clusters, will make the path to middle- and high-income status more difficult to achieve.
That poses important challenges for development policy, which further trade liberalization can alleviate only marginally.
Rethinking the Monetization Taboo
LONDON – Now that the pace of the US Federal Reserve’s “tapering” of its asset-purchase program has been debated to death, attention will increasingly turn to prospects for interest-rate increases.
But another question looms: How will central banks achieve a final “exit” from unconventional monetary policy and return balance sheets swollen by unconventional monetary policy to “normal” levels?
To many, a larger issue needs to be addressed.
The Fed’s tapering merely slows the growth of its balance sheet.
The authorities would still have to sell $3 trillion of bonds to return to the pre-crisis status quo.
The rarely admitted truth, however, is that there is no need for central banks’ balance sheets to shrink.
They could stay permanently larger; and, for some countries, permanently bigger central-bank balance sheets will help reduce public-debt burdens.
As a recent IMF paper by Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff illustrates, advanced economies face debt burdens that cannot be reduced simply through a mix of austerity, forbearance, and growth.
But if a central bank owns the debt of its own government, no net public liability exists.
The government owns the central bank, so the debt is to itself, and the interest expense comes back to the government as the central bank’s profit.
If central bank holdings of government debt were converted into non-interest-bearing perpetual obligations, nothing substantive would change, but it would become obvious that some previously issued public debt did not need to be repaid.
This amounts to “helicopter money” after the fact.
In 2003, then-Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke argued that Japan, facing deflation, should increase public expenditure or cut taxes, funding the operation by printing money rather than issuing bonds.
This, he argued, was bound to increase national income, because the direct stimulative effect would not be offset by concern about future debt burdens.
His advice was not followed; large Japanese deficits were in fact bond-financed.
But the debts held by the Bank of Japan (BoJ) could still be written off.
In Japan’s case, this would reduce government debt by an amount equal to more than 40% of GDP today, and around 60% if implemented after the bond purchases planned for 2014.
Objections focus on two risks: central-bank losses and excessive inflation.
But both of these outcomes can be avoided.
Central banks have bought government bonds with money on which they currently pay zero or very low interest rates.
So, as interest rates rise, central banks might face costs exceeding their income.
But central banks can choose to pay zero interest on a portion of the reserves that commercial banks hold with them, even when they increase the policy interest rate.
And they can require commercial banks to hold zero-interest reserves at the central bank equal to a defined proportion of their loans, thus preventing inflationary growth of private credit and money.
Permanent monetization of government debts is undoubtedly technically possible.
Whether it is desirable depends on the outlook for inflation.
Where inflation is returning to target levels, debt monetization could be unnecessarily and dangerously stimulative.
Central-bank bond sales, while certainly not inevitable, may be appropriate.
But if deflation is the danger, permanent monetization may be the best policy.
I predict that Japan will, in effect, permanently monetize some government debt.
But the government does not need to repay the ¥140 trillion ($1.4 trillion) of its debt that the BoJ already owns.
The BoJ will continue to increase its balance sheet until it achieves its 2% inflation target.
Thereafter, its balance sheet may stabilize in absolute yen terms and fall slowly as a percentage of GDP, but its absolute size will probably never decrease – a likelihood that should cause no concern.
It is precisely what happened to the Fed’s balance sheet after its wartime and postwar buying of US government bonds came to an end in 1951.
Even as permanent monetization occurs, however, the truth may be obfuscated.
If government bond repayments to the BoJ continued, but were always offset by new BoJ bond purchases, and if the BoJ kept the interest rate on reserves at zero, the net effect would be the same as a debt write-off, but the fiction of “normal” central-bank operations could be maintained.
Central banks can monetize debt while pretending not to.
That pretense may reflect a useful taboo: if we overtly recognize that debt write-off/monetization is possible, politicians might want to do it all the time and in excess, not just in circumstances that make it appropriate.
The historical experience of Weimar Germany, or that of Zimbabwe today, illustrates the danger.
As a result, even when permanent monetization occurs – as it almost certainly will in Japan and possibly elsewhere – it may remain forever the policy that dare not speak its name.
Such reticence may serve a useful purpose.
But it must not blind central banks and governments to the full range of policy tools available to address today’s severe debt overhangs.
The Great Credit Mistake
LONDON – Before the financial crisis erupted in 2008, private credit in most developed economies grew faster than GDP.
Then credit growth collapsed.
Whether that fall reflected low demand for credit or constrained supply may seem like a technical issue.
But the answer holds important implications for policymaking and prospects for economic growth.
And the official answer is probably wrong.
The prevailing view has usually stressed supply constraints and the policies needed to fix them.
An impaired banking system, it is argued, starves businesses, particularly small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs), of the funds they need to expand.
In September 2008, US President George W. Bush wanted to “free up banks to resume the flow of credit to American families and businesses.”
The stress tests and recapitalizations of US banks in 2009 were subsequently hailed as crucial to the recovery of both the banking system and the economy.
By contrast, the European Central Bank’s inadequately tough stress tests in 2010 were widely panned for leaving eurozone banks too weak to provide adequate credit.
In the United Kingdom, banks have been criticized for not lending the reserves created by quantitative easing to the real economy, leading the Bank of England to introduce its “funding for lending” scheme in 2012.
In the eurozone, it is hoped that this year’s asset quality review (AQR) and stress tests will finally dispel concerns about bank solvency and free up credit supply.
A “credit crunch” – particularly in trade finance – was certainly a key reason why the financial crisis generated a real economy recession.
Taxpayer-funded bank rescues, higher bank capital requirements, and ultra-easy monetary policy have all been vital to overcome credit supply constraints.
But there is strong evidence that once the immediate crisis was over, lack of demand for credit played a far larger role than restricted supply in impeding economic growth.
That argument is persuasively made by Atif Mian and Amir Sufi in House of Debt, an important new book that analyzes US data on a county-by-county basis.
Mian and Sufi show that the recession was caused by a collapse of household consumption, and that consumption fell most in those counties where pre-crisis borrowing and post-crisis real-estate prices left households facing the largest relative losses in net wealth.
It was in those US counties, too, that local businesses cut employment most aggressively.
For SMEs, a shortage of customers, not a shortage of credit, constrained borrowing, employment, and output.
And the customers were absent because the pre-crisis credit boom had left them over-leveraged.
In the UK, many business surveys from 2009-2012 told the same story.
Poor customer demand was ranked well ahead of credit availability as a constraint on growth.
Economic growth can indeed continue to be severely depressed by a debt overhang even when credit supply is unrestricted and cheap.
Many Japanese companies were left overleveraged by the boom and bust in credit and real estate in the 1980s and early 1990s.
By the late 1990s, the Japanese banking system was offering companies loans at near-zero interest rates.
But, rather than borrow to invest, firms cut investment to pay down debt, driving two decades of stagnation and deflation.
Since 2011, the ECB’s analysis of weak eurozone growth has stressed the negative impact of an impaired and fragmented financial system, with high sovereign-bond yields and funding costs for banks resulting in prohibitive lending terms in the peripheral countries.
Major progress in fixing these problems has already been achieved.
The ECB’s latest Monthly Bulletin documents this, citing multiple indicators of improved credit availability and pricing.
Nonetheless, the rate of decline in private-sector loans has accelerated over the last year – from -0.6% to -2% – and low demand is acknowledged to be the main driver of depressed credit growth.
Simultaneous private deleveraging and fiscal consolidation are restricting eurozone growth far more than remaining restrictions on credit supply.
Despite the ECB’s own evidence, however, the policy focus remains on fixing the credit-supply problem, through the AQR and stress tests, and through the ECB’s own version of a funding for lending scheme, announced on June 5.
That reflects a recurring tendency in official policy debates, particularly in the eurozone, to concentrate on fixable problems to the exclusion of more difficult issues.
Fixing impaired banking systems after a crisis is both essential and achievable.
Moreover, even when public rescue costs are inevitable, they are typically small change compared to the economic harm wrought by the financial crisis and post-crisis recession.
By contrast, a large debt overhang may be intractable unless policy orthodoxies are challenged.
Japan offset private deleveraging in the 1990s by running massive public deficits.
The US has pulled out of recession faster than the eurozone, not only – or even primarily – because it fixed its banking system faster, but because it pursued more stimulative fiscal policies.
But fiscal stimulus is constrained within the eurozone, where member countries no longer issue their own currency and “sovereign” debt therefore carries a default risk.
Aggressive monetary expansion through quantitative easing is also far more complicated and politically contentious in a currency area with no federal debt for the central bank to buy.
To survive and thrive, the eurozone will need to become more centralized, with some common fiscal revenues, expenditures, and debts.
Of course, this scenario implies immensely difficult political choices.
But the starting point for debate must be realism about the nature and severity of the problems facing the eurozone.
If eurozone policy assumes that fixing the banks will fix the economy, the next ten years in Europe could look like the 1990s in Japan.
A Daughter of Dictatorship and Democracy
SEOUL – It is something of a cliché question in South Korea nowadays: Who would be the country’s next president if the election were held tomorrow, rather than in December 2012?
Numerous opinion polls show Park Geun-hye of the ruling Grand National Party (GNP) to be the leading candidate.
If elected, she would be South Korea’s first woman president, and, for her rivals, her dominant position in the race is an uncomfortable but unassailable fact.
South Korean voters of all ages and regions have welcomed Park as a candidate for their country’s leadership.
Her political style is both refreshing and relevant, because she comes across as sincere and forthright at a time when the public is hungry for moral leadership.
And she has an astonishing talent for simplifying complicated issues accurately, which she likely learned – along with how to interpret and manipulate the political connotations of every issue – from her father, former President Park Chung-hee.
Acclaimed as a national hero among radical right-wingers, the iron-fisted Park Chung-hee ruled South Korea from 1963 to 1979, in the wake of the 1961 military coup, only to be assassinated by his intelligence chief.
His daughter is proud of his legacy, which marked the beginning of South Korea’s economic boom.
Indeed, as a pillar of export-oriented modernity, Park Chung-hee was once lionized as the archetype of a modernizing political leadership in military-authoritarian states.
At home, he still ranks first in popularity among the country’s heads of state, kindling nostalgia like a popular old record – a corollary to people’s frustration and anger at the current government of President Lee Myung-bak.
Park, who lost her first bid for the GNP’s nomination to Lee in 2007, needs to ensure that no rupture with her erstwhile rival knocks her off the path to victory in 2012.
An astute politician, Park did not hesitate to campaign wholeheartedly for Lee the last time around – a move that, as part of long-term political strategy, made perfect sense.
To many South Koreans, the election is now Park’s to lose.
No candidate on the horizon seems able to stop her.
If she wins, it will be the result of her seriousness and tenacity, not her political heritage.
No one in South Korea’s conservative movement doubts that Park is one of them.
And, as an icon of the right, she is well aware that she cannot afford to betray her status.
Despite her charisma, Park is neither a Sarah Palin nor an Eva Peron.
Indeed, she looks more like a Korean Margaret Thatcher – a lady not for turning, in Thatcher’s famous phrase, and with clearly thought-through political principles animating her actions.
In any case, she seems destined to establish a new South Korea focusing on her landmark pledge ‘jul pu se,’ literally meaning ‘reduce-loosen-strengthen tax-cuts,’ deregulation, and law and order, not just to add another chapter to her father’s old book.
Her administration would mark a fresh departure from the country’s troubled recent past.
Left-leaning pundits claim that the dictator’s daughter has the same autocratic vision as her father, though Park invariably prefers incremental change to radical measures, and cut her political teeth in the tough-minded politics of the GNP.
Others take a flagrantly sexist stance, arguing that a woman president would be a non-starter as long as the North Korean regime continues to threaten national security.
Although these criticisms don’t seem to bother the electorate very much, Park’s path to victory may yet prove narrower than her supporters expect.
She has been called the “Queen of Elections,” in particular since she won a campaign in 2006 after being slashed with a box cutter by a deranged man.
But she must convincingly outline practical strategies to resolve South Korea’s most serious problems, including high unemployment, worsening educational performance, and North Korea’s nuclear weapons program.
Ms. Park once pledged to provide loans for working-class families from elementary school to college years, while contending that local universities should be empowered to have more autonomy.
She favors engagement policy and the six-party talks so as to resolve the nuclear troubles.
Come presidential election-day in 2012, South Korean voters will pick the candidate who embodies pragmatism and centrism over a partisan or ideologue.
Park’s success will depend, in the end, on the effectiveness of her campaign in further defining her character along those lines.
Unlike former Peruvian dictator Alberto Fujimori’s daughter, who lost her presidential bid in Peru last month, Park is likely to defy her family’s tragic history.
If she does, she will be Asia’s most powerful woman, perhaps the most powerful in the world, at the end of next year.
A Day for Planetary Justice
PRINCETON – What we are doing to our planet, to our children and grandchildren, and to the poor, by our heedless production of greenhouse gases, is one of the great moral wrongs of our age.
On October 24, you can stand up against this injustice.
October 24 is 350 Day.
The name comes from the number of parts per million of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere that, according to Jim Hansen, perhaps the world’s leading climate scientist, we should not exceed if we are to avoid potentially catastrophic climate change.
It is a measure of the seriousness of our problem that CO2 is already at 386 ppm, and is rising by two ppm each year.
The need to cut greenhouse gases has become increasingly clear as predictions of global warming – denounced as “alarmist” when they were first made just a few years ago – have repeatedly turned out to have been too conservative.
We are approaching a point of no return, at which feedback loops will kick in and continue to warm the planet, no matter what we do.
The melting of arctic ice is one example.
Four hundred years ago, explorers sought the legendary “Northeast Passage” across the north of Europe and Russia to China.
They found the arctic ice impenetrable, and soon gave up their quest.
This year, commercial vessels successfully navigated the Northeast Passage.
That is one of many recent dramatic signs that our climate is changing and that our planet is warmer than it has been for a very long time.
But ice-free arctic waters are more than a symptom of global warming. They are themselves a cause of further warming: ice and snow reflect the sun’s rays.
An ice-free surface absorbs more warmth from the sun than one covered in snow or ice.  In other words, our greenhouse gas emissions have, by causing enough warming to melt the arctic ice, created a feedback loop that will generate more warming, and melt more ice, even if we were to stop emitting all greenhouse gases tomorrow.
Other feedback loops pose a similar danger.
In Siberia, vast quantities of methane, an extremely potent greenhouse gas, are locked up in what used to be called “permafrost” – regions in which it was assumed that the ground was permanently frozen.
But areas that used to be frozen are now thawing, releasing methane and thus contributing to further warming – and to further thawing, which releases more methane.
Developing nations are grasping just how outrageous the current distribution of greenhouse-gas emissions really is.
At the United Nations Summit on Climate Change in September, President Paul Kagame of Rwanda pointed out that, while developed nations outside Africa are almost entirely responsible for the problem, its greatest impact will probably be on Africa, which has few resources to cope with the challenge.
Kagame then suggested giving every country an annual per capita quota for CO2 emissions, and allowing developing countries that are below the quota to trade their excess quota with countries that are above theirs.
The money that developing countries would receive for this would not be aid, but rather a recognition that the rich nations must pay for something that in the past they simply appropriated: far more than their fair share of our atmosphere’s capacity to absorb our waste gases.
Sri Lanka took a similar stance, using studies from the UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change to calculate that in 2008, environmentally permissible carbon emissions totaled no more than 2,172 kilograms per person.
In fact, the world’s per capita emissions were 4,700 kilograms, or more than double the permissible limit.
But, while emissions in the rich nations were far above the permissible limit, Sri Lankan emissions were, at 660 kilograms, well below it.
As Sri Lanka’s government pointed out, “That means low-emitting countries like us could not emit more because our space has already been exploited by developed or global heavy polluting countries without our consent.”
This situation is an injustice of vast proportions, reminiscent of – and arguably much worse than – the now-repudiated colonialism of the Western powers in the nineteenth century.
The task of remedying it must begin at the meeting on climate change that will be held in Copenhagen in December.
Many political leaders have expressed support for strong action on climate change, but what most of them regard as “strong action” will not be enough to get us back below 350 ppm.
In some countries, including the United States, there are major political obstacles to taking even modest steps.
On October 24, people in nearly every country will be taking action to raise awareness of the need for an international treaty to bring our atmosphere back to 350 ppm of CO2.
There will be climbers hanging banners high in the Himalayas, where the glaciers are melting, and scuba divers at Australia’s Great Barrier Reef, which is threatened by climate change.
Churches will ring bells 350 times, 350 cyclists will circle towns, and, in many places, 350 trees will be planted.
At www.350.org you can find out what is happening near you and join in, or put your own idea online.
But don’t just sit back and hope that others will do enough to make an impact.
One day your grandchildren will ask you: what did you do to meet the greatest moral challenge of your time?
A Day of Liberation
When I was seven years old, in 1960, my grandmother Angelica opened my eyes to the meaning of 8 May 1945, the day when Nazi Germany surrendered and World War II ended in Europe.
We were spending our summer holidays in Normandy where the liberation of Europe from Nazism had started on D-Day, 6 June 1944.
One evening, I listened to my parents and my grandmother talking about the past.
I have forgotten the details of their conversation, but I can still hear my grandmother’s sigh of relief when she said “Thank God we lost that war!”
From a child’s perspective, it wasn’t self-evident that losing was a good thing.
But of course, my grandmother was right to equate defeat with liberation.
The more I have thought about the lesson she taught me 45 years ago, the clearer I have seen another, less obvious dimension in what she said: It is “we” who lost the war.
Collectively, the Germans had not been the innocent victims of a small gang of criminal outsiders called “Nazis” – Nazism had been an inside ideology supported by millions of Germans, and every German was liable for its atrocities whether or not he or she had adhered to it individually.
In today’s Germany, an overwhelming majority subscribes to the proposition that 8 May 1945 was a day of liberation – not only for Europe, but also for Germany itself.
Compared to public opinion in 1960, that’s certainly an enormous progress.
But paradoxically, it may also contain an element of forgetfulness, because it tends to conceal the fact that liberation required a military defeat.
To use my grandmother’s parlance, it is not “us” who were the liberators, but “them”.
The way people see the past tells us more about their present attitudes than about the past itself.
This is what the term “politics of memory” is meant to indicate.
And this is why it doesn’t matter whether the relevant events happened 60 years ago (as World War II), 90 years (as in the case of the Armenian genocide) or even 600 years (such as the battle of Kosovo in 1389).
A violent conflict in the past may survive as a war of memories in the present, as can be observed in the current dispute between China and South Korea on one side, and Japan on the other.
A war of memories, in turn, may sometimes lead to a violent conflict in the future.
Former perpetrators often try to de-legitimize their former victims’ moral superiority by claiming they were victims themselves.
Therefore, the 60th anniversary of the firebombing of Dresden by Allied forces on 13 February 1945 has probably been a more crucial moment in terms of the German “politics of memory” than the 60th anniversary of 8 May 1945 is going to be.
Far-right groups infamously dubbed the attack by which at least 30,000 people were killed “Dresden’s Holocaust of bombs.”
Fortunately, their propaganda campaign has been a failure.
Although it is true that thousands of the civilians killed in Dresden and other German cities were innocent at an individual level, there can be no doubt it was morally imperative that Germany be defeated collectively.
On the left side of the German political spectrum, the proposition that 8 May 1945 was a day of liberation remains unchallenged.
However, it is sometimes repressed that the massive use of force had been necessary to achieve that result.
Left-wing pacifism tends to overlook this simple fact.
Its slogan “Never again war!” is only half the truth – the other half is “Never again appeasement!” 8 May 1945 was not “zero hour,” as a popular saying in Germany goes.
It had an antecedent, that is, a lack of pre-emptive resistance at home and abroad to the threat that built up in Nazi Germany during the 1930’s.
There is yet another lesson to be learned.
Yes, 8 May 1945 was a day of liberation to which the Soviet army contributed decisively.
But for millions of Central and East Europeans, liberation was followed by Stalin’s oppressive regime.
The current war of memories between the Baltic republics and Russia, with regard to the international celebration in Moscow on 9 May this year, reminds Germany of a special historic responsibility.
The German-Soviet non-aggression treaty, the so-called Hitler-Stalin pact, concluded in August 1939, had been supplemented by a secret appendix dividing the border states Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland and Romania into spheres of interest for the two parties.
But excusing Nazi atrocities by pointing to Stalinist crimes is an intellectually and morally unacceptable stratagem.
When Chancellor Schröder travels to Moscow for the Red Square celebrations, he should bear in mind Nazi Germany’s contribution to the Baltic tragedy.
On 8 May this year, public speakers will remind us how important it is not to forget.
They will stress that if the lessons of history are not learned, history is bound to repeat itself.
All this is perfectly true.
But personally, I will also remember my grandmother’s sentence “Thank God we lost that war!”
Thank God – and thanks to all those brave Allied soldiers who sacrificed their lives for the sake of Europe’s liberty.
Crashing the SDR
SANTA BARBARA – The Chinese government’s campaign to have its currency, the renminbi, included in the International Monetary Fund’s reserve asset appears to be on the brink of success.
Last week, IMF staff formally recommended adding the renminbi to the basket of currencies that determines the value of its so-called Special Drawing Rights (SDRs).
The addition of the renminbi to the basket, which currently includes the US dollar, the euro, the British pound, and the Japanese yen, would provide China with a boost to its prestige.
More important, it would advance the government’s efforts to internationalize the renminbi.
But it would also be a mistake.
The decision to recommend the renminbi’s inclusion, far from having been made on sound economic grounds, can only be understood as political.
As such, the long-term consequences are likely to be regrettable.
On a purely technical basis, the renminbi’s qualifications for inclusion in the SDR basket are questionable.
Traditionally, the IMF has insisted on two criteria: a currency’s issuing country must be among the world’s leading exporters, and the currency must be “freely usable” – widely used and traded.
As the world’s largest exporter, China clearly meets the first condition.
The second, however, is probably still beyond its reach.
The renminbi is by no means in the same league as the SDR basket’s four incumbent currencies.
In 2014, China’s currency ranked seventh in global central-bank reserves, eighth in international bond issuance, and 11th in global currency trading.
Moreover, the renminbi remains non-convertible for most capital transactions, China’s financial markets are primitive, and trading margins for the exchange rate are still set daily by the monetary authorities.
Indeed, as recently as August, the IMF was skeptical about adding the renminbi to the SDR basket, saying that “significant work” was still needed, and suggesting that a decision should be put off until 2016 in order to ensure a “smooth” transition.
So why did the IMF flip?
The answer is obvious: China mounted a full-court press to change minds.
In August, the currency’s exchange-rate regime was loosened slightly.
Renminbi-denominated government bonds were issued in London, and plans were laid to create new trading platforms for the currency in several European financial centers.
And Chinese policymakers made it abundantly clear how unhappy they would be with a negative decision.
Their pressure paid off.
One by one, Western governments fell in line behind the renminbi, despite its practical limitations.
The Fund got the message, and now the fix is in.
The recommendation to enlarge the SDR basket has been warmly backed by Christine Lagarde, the IMF’s managing director, and a final decision by the Fund’s executive board is expected at the end of the month.
Many would argue that this is a positive development.
Certainly, it mollifies China’s leaders, offering them a stronger incentive to continue to work within the existing international monetary regime.
Recent Chinese initiatives, especially the creation of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, have given rise to fears that the country intends to build a new set of international institutions to compete with Western-dominated organizations like the IMF.
The decision to add the renminbi to the SDR basket may have put that danger into remission.
On the other hand, the move sets a worrying precedent, injecting politics into a policy area that had been governed by objective economic considerations.
Conceivably, over the longer term, China’s successful campaign could now open the door to lobbying by other governments to include their currencies as well.
Why not add the Swiss franc or the Canadian dollar?
Or, for that matter, why not include the Russian ruble or Indian rupee?
What was once the dignified preserve of obviously elite currencies could become the site of messy political battles for elevated status.
Of course, it can be argued that China’s recent economic trajectory means that it is only a matter of time before the renminbi does become a match for the SDR’s incumbents.
After all, international use of the currency has been growing exponentially.
But that optimistic assessment overestimates the renminbi’s prospects and illustrates the danger of linear extrapolation of the past into the future.
Likewise, use of the renminbi for the purpose of invoicing and settling trade with China is bound to continue growing.
But in terms of the all-important roles of a currency as an investment vehicle or reserve asset, the outlook for the renminbi is much less promising, owing to China’s still-tight capital controls and low level of financial development.
Nor is inclusion of the renminbi in the SDR basket likely to provide as big a boost to the currency’s internationalization as many believe.
Some central banks may decide to follow suit, adding renminbi-denominated assets to their reserves to match the composition of the basket.
But the increase will be marginal at best – some $40 billion in the next few years, according to the IMF’s calculations.
With global reserves now totaling more than $10 trillion, that is a mere drop in the proverbial bucket.
The political reasons for including the renminbi in the SDR are all too clear.
Unfortunately, the risks of doing so are no less obvious.
A Defeat for International Tax Cooperation
NEW YORK – Most of the world’s governments – eager to mobilize more tax revenues to finance development and curb pervasive tax-avoidance schemes, such as those revealed in the so-called Luxembourg Leaks scandal last year – have an interest in collaborating on taxation matters.
Yet at the Third International Conference on Financing for Development, held in Addis Ababa last month, the momentum toward strengthening international tax cooperation came to an abrupt halt.
Developed countries blocked a proposal at the conference to establish an intergovernmental tax body within the United Nations to replace the current UN Committee of Experts.
These countries insist that tax cooperation should take place exclusively under the leadership of the OECD, a body that they control.
The rest of the world should hope this will prove to be a pause rather than an end to progress on international tax cooperation, which began 13 years ago, at the first International Conference on Financing for Development in Monterrey, Mexico.
Two years later, in 2004, the United Nations Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) upgraded its “ad hoc group” of tax experts to a regular committee.
This meant that the experts would meet regularly and have an expanded mandate that went beyond merely updating a model double-taxation treaty.
Four years later, at the Second Conference on Financing for Development, in Doha, Qatar, policymakers acknowledged that more needed to be done in tax matters, and asked ECOSOC to consider strengthening institutional arrangements.
And then, in the year leading up to the Addis Ababa conference, the UN Secretary-General endorsed the need for “an intergovernmental committee on tax cooperation, under the auspices of the United Nations.”
His endorsement, along with strong support from nongovernmental organizations and the Independent Commission for the Reform of International Corporate Taxation, gave greater force to the demand by developing countries, organized around the Group of 77 and China, for an equal voice in setting global tax norms.
Up until the 11th hour of negotiations in Addis Ababa, they stood firm in calling for an intergovernmental body with the mandate and resources to create a coherent global framework for international tax cooperation.
But to no avail: Developed countries, led by the United States and the United Kingdom –home to many of the multinational corporations implicated in the “Lux Leaks” – succeeded in blocking this much-needed advance in global governance.
In the end, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda provides that the current Committee of Experts will continue to function according to its 2004 mandate, with three additional meeting days per year, all funded through voluntary contributions.
That is a profoundly disappointing outcome.
The developed countries have an argument – but not a convincing one.
The OECD, whose members are essentially the world’s 34 richest countries, certainly has the capacity to set international standards on taxation.
Yet the domination of a select group of countries over tax norms has meant that, in reality, the global governance architecture for taxation has not kept pace with globalization.
The Monterrey Consensus reached in 2002 included a call to enhance “the voice and participation of developing countries in international economic decision-making and norms-setting.”
But although the OECD invites some developing countries to participate in its discussions to establish norms, it offers them no decision-making power.
The OECD is thus a weak surrogate for a globally representative intergovernmental forum.
Such a body must operate under the auspices of the United Nations, which bears the institutional legitimacy necessary to respond effectively to the challenges of globalization with coherent global standards to combat abusive tax practices and ensure fair taxation of corporate profits worldwide.
Despite the disappointment in Addis Ababa, the call for reform of the international tax system is not likely to be silenced.
Instead, it will grow louder on all sides, as the developed countries’ counter-productive resistance to any give and take on international cooperation results in a tsunami of unilateral tax measures beyond OECD control.
The Making of Euro-Jihadism
MADRID – The Belgian historian Henri Pirenne linked Europe’s birth as a Christian continent in the eighth century to its rupture with Islam.
Pirenne probably would never have expected a Muslim ghetto in Brussels to emerge, much less become a hub of jihadism, with marginalized and angry young Muslims revolting against Europe from within its own borders.
Divorce is not an option these days.
But nor is the kind of marriage that the Islam scholar Tariq Ramadan advocates.
Ramadan, a grandson of the founder of the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt, is a Swiss citizen and a resident of the United Kingdom who argues that Islamic ethics and values should be injected into the European system.
Europe would then not just tolerate Islam, but actually embrace it as an integral part of itself.
The problem with Ramadan’s vision is that Europe is an overwhelmingly secular continent, with a profoundly forward-thinking approach to ethics.
Islamic societies, by contrast, are both deeply religious and deeply embedded in the past.
When Islamists speak of political or social reform, they are typically looking backward, hoping to resurrect a time when core European principles – from gender equality to gay marriage – were repudiated.
“We cannot,” he writes, “support dictatorships … be silent when civilians are massacred south of our borders, and hope that we will not receive a response to the injustice and humiliation we have provoked.”
But it is the United States that launched wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, offers unconditional support to Israel, and has repeatedly propped up Arab autocrats.
And it is Europe that has consistently criticized these policies – often harshly.
Yet America is not being subjected to a major surge of jihadist sentiment within its borders.
It might have helped that US President Barack Obama backed away from some of these policies.
When the Arab Spring uprisings began, for example, he was quick to cut support for Tunisian President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali and Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, allowing protesters – inspired by the Western model of democracy – to secure regime change.
The return to autocracy in Egypt in 2013, via Abdel Fattah el-Sisi’s coup d’état, certainly was not aided by the US or Europe, both of which supported the democratically elected Muslim Brotherhood.
Europe has offered even more direct help to Arab countries in recent years.
If it were not for Europe’s military intervention, Libyans would still be living under the tyrannical Muammar el-Qaddafi.
True, Europe could have done more to prevent the ensuing chaos in Libya.
But the people of Libya surely must take responsibility for the proliferation of competing militias that refuse to unite to save their state from total collapse.
More broadly, though the West – especially the US – has made grave policy errors in the Arab world over the last 50 years, external powers cannot be blamed entirely for the region’s meltdown.
That is the result of a profound civilizational crisis – one that can be redressed only by the people of the Arab world.
If Europe’s foreign policy is not responsible for the Arab world’s current turmoil, it certainly cannot be the reason for the rise of jihadism within its own borders.
The real problem lies at home: a disastrous deficit of effective policies related to social justice, education, housing, and employment for young European Muslims.
Marginalization generates frustration, which is subsequently fed by growing Islamophobia and the rise of raucous right-wing movements throughout the continent.
This link is apparent in the fact that the majority of European jihadists come from underprivileged backgrounds.
Not particularly well versed in the true teachings of Islam, and lacking opportunities to improve their lives, they become easy prey for extremists.
Jihadism, with its absolute certainty and grand mission, offers a sense of purpose, pride, and identity – not to mention adventure – and an outlet for their anger against the “home” that has denied them those things.
The story of America’s Muslims is the measure of Europe’s failure.
Like most Americans, Muslims in the US maintain a certain amount of faith in the American dream.
They are mostly middle class, and, despite all the talk about rising economic inequality, they have not given up on the belief that, in the US, hard work and initiative are rewarded.
America is a country of immigrants, with a dynamic economy that has enabled newcomers, time and again, to achieve great success.
In Europe, by contrast, improving one’s social standing has always been very difficult; and, at a time of economic stagnation and staggeringly high unemployment, it is not getting any easier.
Socially, America also offers something to Muslims that Europe does not.
Its fundamentally religious culture enables Muslims to retain their identity to a far greater extent than in secular Europe.
Indeed, America’s core values – personal responsibility and constitutional patriotism – can be easier for Muslims to swallow than Europe’s more aggressively secular brand of liberalism.
As a result, integration and assimilation tend to be easier for Muslims in America.
All of this suggests that Europe must look inward to address homegrown jihadism effectively.
This does not mean that it should temper its secularism, much less its liberal values.
Rather, Europe must breathe life into its own “European dream,” ensuring that all people have access to real opportunities to improve their lives.
Otherwise, it will face a lost generation of millions of young Europeans – Muslim and otherwise.
The New Climate Economics
NEW YORK – This Friday, in its latest comprehensive assessment of the evidence on global warming, the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change will show that the world’s climate scientists are more certain than ever that human activity – largely combustion of fossil fuels – is causing temperatures and sea levels to rise.
In recent years, a series of extreme weather events – including Hurricane Sandy in New York and New Jersey, floods in China, and droughts in the American Midwest, Russia, and many developing countries – have caused immense damage.
Last week, Mexico experienced simultaneous hurricanes in the Pacific and in the Gulf of Mexico that devastated towns and cities in their path.
Climate change will be a major driver of such events, and we risk much worse.
This puts a new debate center stage: how to reconcile increased action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions with strong economic growth.
It is a debate that is already mired in controversy.
As most countries have started making serious investments in renewable energy, and many are implementing carbon prices and regulations, critics complain that such policies may undermine growth.
With the global economy still recovering from the 2008 financial crash, higher energy costs – not yet fully offset by greater energy efficiency – are worrying business and political leaders.
The advent of shale gas has confused the energy debate even more.
If gas is substituted for coal, it can be a useful bridge to a low-carbon future.
But astonishingly, it is coal, the dirtiest fuel, that is experiencing the sharpest increase in use.
Companies and investors are hedging their bets by taking a few resource-efficiency measures and investing in some low-carbon assets, but leaving their high-carbon portfolios and activities largely intact.
Policy vacillation in some countries has not helped.
Advocates of stronger action respond that low-carbon investments can generate much stronger, cleaner growth.
They point to the savings available from energy efficiency, and to the market opportunities generated by clean-energy technologies as the processes of learning and discovery take hold.
They seek to demonstrate the benefits that a more sustainable pattern of development can bring to the world’s cities, to people’s health (from the reduction in air pollution), to energy security, and to the ability of the world’s poor to access energy.
And they propose green bonds and public investment banks to finance new infrastructure and jobs at a time when world interest rates are low and demand is depressed in many countries.
These are serious economic debates, but too often they have become entangled in ideological disputes about the appropriate response to the economic crisis and the value of government intervention in markets.
That is regrettable.
Climate change is not a partisan issue, and climate policy is essentially market-based.
It is about correcting market failures so that markets and entrepreneurship can play their proper role of ensuring innovation and efficient resource allocation.
In order to escape this impasse, we have helped to launch the Global Commission on the Economy and Climate.
The Commission’s New Climate Economy project brings together seven leading policy research institutes from six continents, overseen by a panel of former heads of government and finance ministers and prominent business leaders, and advised by a panel of leading economists from across the world.
Its purpose is to provide authoritative new evidence concerning how governments and businesses can achieve stronger economic growth while simultaneously addressing climate risks.
Few governments or investors start from the standpoint of climate change.
They want to promote investment and economic growth, create jobs, stabilize public finances, expand markets, turn profits, ensure reliable energy and food supplies, produce goods and services, reduce poverty, and build cities.
So the primary question that we need to ask is not whether we can reduce emissions, but how public policy can help to achieve these core goals while reducing emissions and building a more climate-resilient economy.
There is now a lot of experience around the world in this area.
When the Stern Review on the economics of climate change was published seven years ago, the subject was largely theoretical.
Now countries at all stages of development are pursuing new patterns of economic growth that take climate into account.
Germany, for example, is planning the world’s most ambitious low-carbon energy transition, based on energy conservation and renewables.
South Korea has made “green growth” a central economic goal.
Mexico’s 2012 General Law on Climate Change has put it on course for a major increase in clean power.
China has placed the industrial development of green technologies at the top of its agenda.
Ethiopia is seeking to move to lower-carbon farming.
Brazil has significantly reduced the rate of deforestation in the Amazon.
Some major businesses are providing powerful examples of what is possible.
Unilever has committed to the sustainable sourcing of agricultural and forest products.
Coca-Cola is phasing out all use of climate-polluting hydrofluorocarbons.
The retail giant Wal-Mart is driving emissions reduction throughout its supply chain.
Meanwhile, the World Bank and the European Investment Bank have stopped lending to high-emission coal plants.
Yet genuine questions remain about how fast economies should move on to a low-carbon path, and the most effective way to do so.
Some low-carbon policies have clearly been expensive, while other, apparently cost-effective options, have not been pursued at all.
Any structural transformation involves costs, trade-offs, and uncertainties, and it is vital that we understand these properly.
Powerful interests will, of course, oppose any low-carbon transition, dismissing and often drowning out those who stand to benefit.
That makes it even more important to clarify the choices.
As science makes clear how imperative the climate question is, it is time for economists and policymakers to explain how it can be answered.
Only the Poor Die Young
ROTTERDAM – People who are lower on the socioeconomic ladder (indicated by their level of education, occupation, or income) have shorter and less healthy lives, on average, than those on higher rungs.
Indeed, life expectancy at birth often varies by 5-10 years, depending on social and economic well-being, with poorer people spending 10-20 more years of life suffering from illness or disability than their wealthier counterparts.
In the nineteenth century, this situation would not have been surprising, given low average income, widespread poverty, and lack of social security.
But such data are commonly reported for high-income countries today, including those ranking high on indices of economic prosperity and human development – even Western Europe’s highly developed welfare states.
Since the end of World War II, Western European countries have tried to reduce socioeconomic inequality, or offset its consequences, through progressive taxation, social security programs, and a wide range of collectively financed provisions, such as public housing, education, health care, and cultural and leisure facilities.
But, while these policies have reduced inequalities in some social and economic outcomes, including income, housing quality, and health-care access, they have been insufficient to eliminate health inequalities.
Long-term time-series data indicate that the socioeconomic mortality gap narrowed before the 1950’s, but has grown substantially since then.
More puzzling is the fact that more generous welfare policies do not translate into smaller health disparities.
Even the Nordic countries – world leaders when it comes to creating universal and well-designed welfare policies that cover citizens from cradle to grave – face significant health disparities, despite their relatively low income inequality.
To be sure, modern welfare states have far from abolished social inequality, with disparities in access to material and human resources continuing to generate highly unequal lives among their citizens. But the welfare state’s aim has never been radical redistribution of wealth.
Rather, welfare policies are intended to create a compromise between the interests of employees and employers, laborers and the middle classes. As a result, their redistributive effects are modest.
So, while a partial failure of the welfare state may help to explain the persistence of health inequalities, one must look elsewhere to understand – and reverse – their rise. Two possible explanations have emerged from the rapidly growing scientific literature on the subject: selective upward social mobility and delayed diffusion of behavioral change.
In reality, both factors are at work.
During the twentieth century, social mobility increased slowly but steadily in all high-income countries, with educational achievement and occupational status depending less on family background and more on cognitive ability and other personal characteristics.
As a result, the lower socioeconomic groups have not only shrunk in size, but have probably also become more homogeneous in terms of personal characteristics that increase the risk of health problems.
Moreover, people with a higher socioeconomic position tend to adopt new behaviors first, and to abandon more readily behaviors that are found to damage health, such as smoking and high-fat diets.
Given this, new behavioral recommendations by health authorities tend to exacerbate health inequalities, at least temporarily.
Significant disparities in smoking, physical exercise, diet, and alcohol consumption afflict many of Western Europe’s welfare states.
The welfare system, which was created to combat poverty, has been less effective against “diseases of affluence” like heart disease and lung cancer.
All of this highlights the need for creative solutions to disparities that unnecessarily and unfairly blight the lives of those who have the least, generate massive health-care costs, and pose a barrier to increased labor-force participation (impeding efforts in some countries to raise the retirement age).
In the last few decades, social policy in most Western European countries has moved away from redistribution. This is a mistake, given that the consequences of this shift – rising income inequality, weaker social safety nets, and reduced health-care access – will aggravate health inequalities in the long run.
In fact, more, better-targeted redistributive policies, which account for the effects of selective upward social mobility and different rates of diffusion of behavioral change, are crucial to improving health outcomes in lower socioeconomic groups.
Income support should be complemented by preventive health programs, while health literacy programs could help to diminish the link between low cognitive ability and bad health.
Equal access to health care is not enough. Reducing inequalities in health outcomes requires more intensive health care for patients in lower socioeconomic brackets, tailored to their specific needs and challenges.
For example, revenues from tobacco taxation, which disproportionately affects lower income groups, should be used to fund cessation-support programs that target disadvantaged smokers.
Significant and persistent health inequality indicates that, by raising the health levels of those with lower incomes or less education, massive strides could be made in improving populations’ overall health.
This may require reshaping the welfare system to some extent, but the payoff would be well worth the effort.
Read more from "Visionary Voices"
The Mouse Click that Roared
CAMBRIDGE – Until recently, cyber security has primarily interested computer geeks and cloak-and-dagger types.
The Internet’s creators, part of a small, enclosed community, were very comfortable with an open system in which security was not a primary concern.
But, with some three billion or so users on the Web nowadays, that very openness has become a serious vulnerability; indeed, it is endangering the vast economic opportunities that the Internet has opened for the world.
A “cyber attack” can take any number of forms, including simple probes, defacement of Web sites, denial-of-service attacks, espionage, and destruction of data.
And the term “cyber war,” though best defined as any hostile action in cyberspace that amplifies or is equivalent to major physical violence, remains equally protean, reflecting definitions of “war” that range from armed conflict to any concerted effort to solve a problem (for example, “war on poverty”).
Cyber war and cyber espionage are largely associated with states, while cyber crime and cyber terrorism are mostly associated with non-state actors.
The highest costs currently stem from espionage and crime; but, over the next decade or so, cyber war and cyber terrorism may become greater threats than they are today.
Moreover, as alliances and tactics evolve, the categories may increasingly overlap.
Terrorists might buy malware from criminals, and governments might find it useful to hide behind both.
Some people argue that deterrence does not work in cyberspace, owing to the difficulties of attribution.
But that is facile: inadequate attribution affects inter-state deterrence as well, yet it still operates.
Even when the source of an attack can be successfully disguised under a “false flag,” governments may find themselves sufficiently enmeshed in symmetrically interdependent relationships such that a major attack would be counterproductive.
China, for example, would lose from an attack that severely damaged the American economy, and vice versa.
An unknown attacker may also be deterred by cyber-security measures.
If firewalls are strong, or redundancy and resilience allow quick recovery, or the prospect of a self-enforcing response (“an electric fence”) seems possible, an attack becomes less attractive.
While accurate attribution of the ultimate source of a cyber attack is sometimes difficult, the determination does not have to be airtight.
To the extent that false flags are imperfect and rumors of the source of an attack are widely deemed credible (though not legally probative), reputational damage to an attacker’s soft power may contribute to deterrence.
Finally, a reputation for offensive capability and a declared policy that keeps open the means of retaliation can help to reinforce deterrence.
Of course, non-state actors are harder to deter, so improved defenses such as pre-emption and human intelligence become important in such cases.
But, among states, even nuclear deterrence was more complex than it first looked, and that is doubly true of deterrence in the cyber domain.
Given its global nature, the Internet requires a degree of international cooperation to be able to function.
Some people call for the cyber equivalent of formal arms-control treaties.
But differences in cultural norms and the difficulty of verification would make such treaties hard to negotiate or implement.
At the same time, it is important to pursue international efforts to develop rules of the road that can limit conflict.
The most promising areas for international cooperation today most likely concern problems posed for states by third parties such as criminals and terrorists.
Russia and China have sought to establish a treaty establishing broad international oversight of the Internet and “information security,” which would prohibit deception and embedding malicious code or circuitry that could be activated in the event of war.
But the US has argued that arms-control measures banning offensive capabilities could weaken defenses against attacks and would be impossible to verify or enforce.
Likewise, in terms of political values, the US has resisted agreements that could legitimize authoritarian governments’ censorship of the Internet – for example, by the “great firewall of China.”
Moreover, cultural differences impede any broad agreements on regulating online content.
Nonetheless, it may be possible to identify behaviors like cyber crime that are illegal in many domestic jurisdictions.
Trying to limit all intrusions would be impossible, but one could start with cyber crime and cyber terrorism involving non-state parties.
Here, major states would have an interest in limiting damage by agreeing to cooperate on forensics and controls.
The transnational cyber domain poses new questions about the meaning of national security.
Some of the most important responses must be national and unilateral, focused on hygiene, redundancy, and resilience.
It is likely, however, that major governments will soon discover that the insecurity created by non-state cyber actors will require closer cooperation among governments.
A Democratic Burma?
TOKYO – Historic transformations often happen when least expected.
Mikhail Gorbachev’s liberalizing policies of glasnost and perestroika in the Soviet Union emerged at one of the Cold War’s darkest hours, with US President Ronald Reagan pushing for strategic missile defense and the two sides fighting proxy wars in Afghanistan and elsewhere.
Deng Xiaoping’s economic opening followed China’s bloody – and failed – invasion of Vietnam in 1978.
And South Africa’s last apartheid leader, F. W. de Klerk, was initially perceived as just another apologist for the system – hardly the man to free Nelson Mandela and oversee the end of white minority rule.
Now the world is suddenly asking whether Burma (Myanmar), after six decades of military dictatorship, has embarked on a genuine political transition that could end the country’s pariah status.
Is Burma, like South Africa under de Klerk, truly poised to emerge from a half-century of self-imposed isolation?
And can Aung San Suu Kyi, the heroic opposition leader, and Thein Sein, Burma’s new president, engineer a political transition as skillfully and peacefully as Mandela and de Klerk did for South Africa in the early 1990’s?
Despite her two decades of house arrest and isolation, Suu Kyi possesses two of the gifts that enabled Mandela to carry out his great task: a reassuring serenity and an utter lack of vindictiveness.
As Burma’s authorities test reform, these gifts, together with her negotiating skills and, most of all, her vast moral authority, will be tested as never before.
Moreover, unlike Mandela during his 27-year imprisonment, Suu Kyi has had her hopes raised – and dashed – before.
In the mid-1990’s, and again in 2002-2003, reconciliation between Suu Kyi’s National League for Democracy (NLD) and the military junta seemed to be in the offing.
On both occasions, however, the regime’s hardliners gained the upper hand, crushing prospects for reform.
Yet Suu Kyi, and much of the Burmese opposition, is beginning to admit that today’s political liberalization might be the real thing.
Because Burma’s generals say almost nothing in public, it is difficult to fathom why they allowed elections that elevated Thein Sein to power, or to explain their willingness to embrace dialogue with the long-suppressed opposition.
Recent events suggest one possible explanation: Burma’s rulers have grown wary of China’s almost smothering embrace – a result of the country’s international isolation.
Indeed, public protests against China’s commercial exploitation of Burma’s natural resources became so widespread that the government called a halt to construction by Chinese investors on the huge and environmentally damaging Myitsone Dam on the Irrawaddy River.
Thein Sein’s decision to halt the project is clearly an important policy shift.
It is also a signal to the outside world that Burma’s new government may be much more willing than any of its predecessors to heed both public pressure and international opinion, both of which vehemently opposed the dam’s construction.
Almost simultaneously, Thein Sein offered even stronger signals that his was a very different Burmese administration: he freed political prisoners and invited Suu Kyi for direct talks with him.
Indeed, Suu Kyi now enjoys far greater freedom of movement than she has at any time since she received the Nobel Peace Prize 20 years ago, and the NLD recently announced that it will field candidates in the forthcoming by-elections to the country’s newly established parliament.
If Suu Kyi is permitted to campaign free of restraint, for both her own seat and to boost the electoral chances of her NLD colleagues, it will be clear that Thein Sein and his government are truly determined to bring their country in from the cold.
For both Suu Kyi and Thein Sein, every step from now on will be delicate, to be calibrated with the same care and deliberation that Mandela and de Klerk used in bridging their differences and leading their country out of isolation.
But the international community, too, must act with great care.
While Thein Sein would undoubtedly wish to see the myriad economic and political sanctions imposed on Burma quickly lifted, it is too soon for a general easing of such measures.
But the outside world should demonstrate that every clear move toward greater political openness will merit more international political and economic engagement.
The Japan Investment Bank’s decision to invest in port development in Burma – essential if the economy, too, is to be opened – is one positive sign that the world will keep pace with Thein Sein step for step.
And US President Barack Obama’s decision to send Secretary of State Hillary Clinton to Burma to meet Thein Sein is another clear sign that the world is ready to end the country’s isolation.
Closer to home, ASEAN’s recent decision to give Burma a chance to chair the organization in 2014 underscores its neighbors’ desire for the country’s full participation in Asia’s growing prosperity.
No one should rush to judgment yet, but Thein Sein’s decisions, at least so far, are beginning to resemble those of South Africa’s de Klerk when he initiated his country’s reform process.
Fortunately, Burma already has in Aung San Suu Kyi its very own Nelson Mandela.
A Devaluation Option for Southern Europe
CAMBRIDGE – This year is likely to mark a make-or-break ordeal for the euro.
The eurozone’s survival demands a credible solution to its long-running sovereign-debt crisis, which in turn requires addressing the two macroeconomic imbalances –&nbsp;external and fiscal –&nbsp;which are at the heart of that crisis.
The crisis has exposed the deep disparities in competitiveness that have developed within the eurozone.
From 1996 to 2010, unit labor costs in Germany increased by just 8%, and by 13% in France. Compare that to 24% in Portugal, 35% in Spain, 37% in Italy, and a whopping 59% in Greece.
The result has been large trade imbalances between eurozone countries, a problem compounded by large fiscal deficits and high levels of public debt in southern Europe (and France) – much of it owed to foreign creditors.
Does addressing these imbalances require breaking up the eurozone?
Suppose, for example, that Portugal were to leave and re-introduce the escudo. The ensuing exchange-rate devaluation would immediately lower the price of Portugal’s exports, raise its import prices, stimulate the economy, and bring about much-needed growth.
But a euro exit would be a messy affair. The resulting turmoil could very well trump any short-term gains in competitiveness from devaluation.
There is a remarkably simple alternative that does not require southern Europe’s troubled economies to abandon the euro and devalue their exchange rates.
It involves increasing the value-added tax while cutting payroll taxes.
Our recent research demonstrates that such a “fiscal devaluation” has very similar effects on the economy in terms of its impact on GDP, consumption, employment, and inflation.
A currency devaluation works by making imports more costly and exports cheaper. A VAT/payroll-tax swap would do exactly the same thing.
An increase in VAT raises the price of imported goods, as foreign firms face a higher tax.
To ensure that domestic firms do not have an incentive to raise prices, an increase in VAT needs to be accompanied by a cut in payroll taxes.
Moreover, since exports are exempt from VAT, the price of domestic exports will fall.
The desired competitiveness effects of exchange-rate devaluation can thus be had while staying in the euro.
This policy can also help on the fiscal front.
As is true of an exchange-rate devaluation, the positive impact on growth of an increase in competitiveness can strengthen the fiscal position by raising tax revenues.
Moreover, an important advantage of fiscal devaluations is that they generate additional revenues in proportion to the country’s trade deficit.
For countries that are suffering from weak competitiveness and, as a consequence, running trade deficits, this typically means more revenues, especially in the short run.
Like exchange-rate devaluations, fiscal devaluations create winners and losers.
Both act as a wealth levy: inflation means that bondholders suffer a real loss in proportion to their wealth and the size of the devaluation.
If taxes on capital are not adjusted, holders of domestic stocks suffer a comparable loss.
By contrast, many transfers, such as unemployment benefits, health benefits, and public pensions, are indexed to inflation, and thus maintain their real value.
The same is true of minimum wages.
These distributive effects play an important role in the politics of exchange-rate devaluations, and most of these effects appear in fiscal devaluations as well.
Fiscal devaluations already have some advocates.
To be sure, feasible fiscal devaluations would be limited in size.
But, together with debt restructuring, accommodative monetary policy, liquidity support from the European Central Bank, and much-required structural reforms, they can help to put these troubled economies on a sound footing without a euro breakup or a major austerity-induced recession.
A Dissident in China
TOKYO – 2009 was a good year for China.
The Chinese economy still roared ahead in the midst of a worldwide recession.
American President Barack Obama visited China, more in the spirit of a supplicant to an imperial court than the leader of the world’s greatest superpower.
Even the Copenhagen summit on climate change ended just the way China wanted: failure in its attempt to commit China, or any other industrial nation, to making significant cuts in carbon emissions, with the United States getting the blame.
The Chinese government, under the Communist Party, has every reason to feel confident.
So why did a gentle former literature professor named Liu Xiaobo have to be sentenced to 11 years in prison, just because he publicly advocated freedom of expression and an end to one-party rule?
Liu was co-author in 2008 of a petition, Charter 08, signed by thousands of Chinese, calling for basic rights to be respected.
Liu is not a violent rebel. His opinions, in articles published on the Internet, are entirely peaceful.
Yet he was jailed for “inciting subversion of state power.”
The notion that Liu might be capable of subverting the immense power of the Communist Party of China is patently absurd.
And yet the authorities clearly believe that they had to make an example of him, to prevent others from expressing similar views.
Why does a regime that appears to be so secure consider mere opinions, or even peaceful petitions, so dangerous?
Perhaps because the regime does not feel as secure as it looks.
Without legitimacy, no government can rule with any sense of confidence.
There are many ways to legitimize political arrangements. Liberal democracy is only a recent invention.
Hereditary monarchy, often backed by divine authority, has worked in the past.
And some modern autocrats, such as Robert Mugabe, have been bolstered by their credentials as national freedom fighters.
China has changed a great deal in the last century, but it has remained the same in one respect: it is still ruled by a religious concept of politics.
Legitimacy is not based on the give and take, the necessary compromises, and the wheeling and dealing that form the basis of an economic concept of politics such as that which underpins liberal democracy.
Instead, the foundation of religious politics is a shared belief, imposed from above, in ideological orthodoxy.
In imperial China, this meant Confucian orthodoxy.
The ideal of the Confucian state is “harmony.”
If all people conform to a particular set of beliefs, including moral codes of behavior, conflicts will disappear.
The ruled, in this ideal system, will naturally obey their rulers, just as sons obey their fathers.
After the various revolutions in the early decades of the twentieth century, Confucianism was replaced by a Chinese version of Communism.
Marxism appealed to Chinese intellectuals, because it was bookish, introduced a modern moral orthodoxy, and was based, like Confucianism, on a promise of perfect harmony.
Ultimately, in the Communist utopia, conflicts of interests would melt away.
Chairman Mao’s rule combined elements of the Chinese imperial system with Communist totalitarianism.
This orthodoxy, however, was also destined to fade away.
Few Chinese, even in the top ranks of the Communist Party, are convinced Marxists anymore.
This left an ideological vacuum, swiftly filled in the 1980’s by greed, cynicism, and corruption.
Out of this crisis came the demonstrations all over China, collectively known as “Tiananmen.”
Liu Xiaobo was an active spokesman in 1989 for the student protests against official corruption and in favor of greater freedom.
Soon after the bloody crackdown on Tiananmen, a new orthodoxy replaced Chinese Marxism: Chinese nationalism.
Only one-party rule would guarantee the continuing rise of China and put an end to centuries of national humiliation.
The Communist Party represented China’s destiny as a great power.
To doubt this was not just mistaken, but unpatriotic, even “anti-Chinese.”
From this perspective, Liu Xiaobo’s critical views were indeed subversive.
They cast doubt on the official orthodoxy, and thus on the legitimacy of the state.
To wonder, as many have, why the Chinese regime refused to negotiate with the students in 1989 – or to find some accommodation with its critics today – is to misunderstand the nature of religious politics.
Negotiation, compromise, and accommodation are the marks of economic politics, where every deal has its price.
By contrast, those who rule according to a shared belief cannot afford to negotiate, for that would undermine the belief itself.
This is not to say that the economic concept of politics is utterly strange to the Chinese – or, for that matter, that the religious notion of politics is unknown in the democratic West.
But the insistence on orthodoxy is still sufficiently strong in China to remain the default defense against political critics.
These things can change.
Other Confucian societies, such as South Korea, Taiwan, and Japan, now have thriving liberal democracies, and there is no reason to believe that such a transition is impossible in China.
But external pressure is unlikely to bring it about.
Many non-Chinese, including me, have signed a letter of protest against the jailing of Liu Xiaobo.
One hopes that this will lend comfort to him, and give a moral boost to Chinese who share his views.
But it is unlikely to impress those who believe in the current orthodoxy of Chinese nationalism.
Until China is released from the grip of religious politics, Liu’s ideals are unlikely to take root.
This does not bode well for China, or, indeed, for the rest of the world.
A Drug War on Auto-Pilot
THE HAGUE – The war in Afghanistan, now approaching its tenth year, may seem to many to have no end in sight, but Latin America has endured an even longer fight, one that has recently become much more bloody: the “war” against drug trafficking.
So rote – and so violent – has that war become that many people in Latin America now wonder which side is suffering the more pathological addiction.
The new strategy that US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has been promoting to staunch the upward trend of narco-trafficking-related murders – which leaked Mexican government reports put at more than 22,000 since late 2006 – is to build “stronger, more resilient communities.”
Ciudad Juárez, a sprawling Mexican border town that is now the homicide capital of the world, would have to be high on the list.
Four bridges and innumerable tunnels and drainage canals connect Ciudad Juárez and El Paso, Texas.
Rival cartels sparring for control of a plaza, the name given to any trafficking route, butcher each other and the security forces.
There is apparently no shortage of young, unemployed men willing to join the carnage.
Addressing the deep-seated social and economic problems of a city like Juárez, however, is a lot harder than flooding its streets with 8,000 soldiers carrying assault rifles.
Mexican President Felipe Calderón has, in this respect, remained faithful to the script written in previous theaters in the drug war, whether in Bolivia, Colombia, or Peru, where governments have used military force and extradition to placate the US and punish those with the least voice and influence.
But the language used by the Obama administration to describe the violence and state corruption that snakes from the Andes to the US border is starting to capture new thinking on narcotics.
Three former Latin American presidents, Mexico’s second richest man, Ricardo Salinas, and the Supreme Court of Argentina, among others, have criticized the war on drugs as a manifest failure that has lowered street prices, fueled production, and undermined weak states.
More strikingly, both Bolivia and Ecuador are governed by presidents who suffered directly from the collateral insensitivities of the war on drugs.
Bolivia’s Evo Morales rose to prominence as leader of the country’s coca growers during a brutal campaign to wipe out their crops, the so-called Dignity Plan.
Ecuadoran President Rafael Correa’s father was jailed for smuggling drugs to the US when the future leader was five years old.
These leaders’ profound ambivalence toward the goal of a world free of illegal drugs is shared by the European Union, where restrictions on narcotics consumption have slackened over the past decade.
The past three US presidents, furthermore, have all admitted to consuming – to one extent or another – illegal psychoactive substances, while seven million Americans, according to the United Nations, are regular cocaine users.
But the inertia of a bureaucratic drug-enforcement superstructure (worth approximately $40 billion each in the US and the EU), sustained by a deep-seated fear of the “threat” posed by drugs and cartels, appears to push policy repeatedly towards the familiar option of repressive auto-pilot.
For example, US support for Mexico’s campaign against the cartels looks set in stone, with Congress apparently ready to provide $300 million for another year of military and security upgrading.
In Colombia, seven new joint military installations are planned, and support for US private contractors who have cornered the market in crop fumigation presumably will not be interrupted.
Nevertheless, as the flaws in the four-decade-old edifice of counter-narcotics become more visible, it is increasingly difficult to regard the risks of drug use as being greater than the damage done by repression.
Prohibition hikes the mark-up on prices – an astounding 15,000% in the case of cocaine traveling to Europe from Andean processing facilities.
While the war on drugs focuses on bringing down cartels and their kingpins, it perversely aids the health of their markets, which nestle within legitimate trade flows and respond to price incentives.
Interviewed by the Mexican magazine Proceso this year, the second-in-command of the giant Sinaloa cartel, Ismael Zambada, made the point clearly: “The narco problem involves millions of people.
How do you control it?
The capos can be jailed, killed, or extradited, but their replacements are already wandering around.”
The emergence of Latin America’s powerful drug mafias cannot be traced to the radical evil of certain individuals.
These people emerged under conditions created in deeply inequitable societies by a misapplied, inconsistent, and bureaucratic war.
Indeed, the furies of the Zetas in Mexico originate in the counter-insurgency training provided in the 1990’s to a select group of special-forces soldiers, who later deserted.
The Zetas’ star recruits in recent years have come from the Guatemalan military’s special forces, whose infamous induction technique involved biting off the head of a live chicken.
Meanwhile, in Jamaica and across the rural outposts of Central America, drug lords have become benefactors and heroes to the poor.
It is time for serious reconsideration of the status and regulation of illegal drugs, pointing to selective legalization, as well as reclassification of the market as a public-health, rather than a criminal, concern.
For now, policymakers across the Americas are tiptoeing towards the obvious.
A Global \
ATHENS – The International Monetary Fund’s belated admission that it significantly underestimated the damage that austerity would do to European Union growth rates highlights the self-defeating character of “orthodox” recipes to address the causes of the debt crisis that followed the financial crash of 2008-2009.
Conventional theory suggests that a single country (or group of countries) consolidating its finances can expect lower interest rates, a weaker currency, and an improved trade position.
But, because this cannot happen for all major economies simultaneously – one country’s (or group of countries’) austerity implies less demand for other countries’ products – such policies eventually lead to beggar-thy-neighbor situations.
Indeed, it was this dynamic – against which John Maynard Keynes fought – that made the Great Depression of the 1930’s so grim.
Today’s problems are compounded by a lack of sufficient private demand – particularly household consumption – in the advanced economies to compensate for demand losses stemming from austerity.
During the last two decades, consumption drove these countries’ economic growth, reaching historically high GDP shares.
Moreover, major advanced economies, such as the United States, Germany, and Japan, face longer-term fiscal problems in the form of aging populations or oversize welfare states, limiting their capacity to contribute to demand management.
Recent moves to ease monetary policy have been a step in the right direction; but, so far, they have not proved to be a game changer.
For domestic demand to act as an engine of growth, policies should shift resources from investment to consumption.
While the magnitudes involved are huge, they must be attained if an extended period of low growth, high unemployment, and declining living standards among the world’s poorest is to be avoided.
International economic policy coordination should be significantly strengthened in order to deal effectively with changes on such a scale.
Start with Europe.
It is by now patently obvious that austerity and domestic reforms are not enough to pull the eurozone’s periphery out of deep recession.
Growing awareness of the failure of current policies is causing social discontent, civil disorder, and political instability, with the recently concluded Italian elections and the growing popular resistance to Greek reform efforts serving as a bellwether.
Returning the eurozone’s peripheral economies to the path of growth requires more than structural reforms and fiscal consolidation.
But Europe should move more decisively in this direction.
Otherwise, speculation on member states’ national debt will persist, keeping borrowing costs at levels that are inconsistent with the conditions required to sustain economic recovery.
Concerning external demand, intra-European help in the form of reflationary policies in stronger economies is unlikely to prove sufficient, owing primarily to the fiscal and political conditions prevailing in Germany.
Implementing a Marshall Plan-type initiative by mobilizing EU budget resources and additional lending by the European Investment Bank to finance investments in weaker countries could be an alternative, but it lacks political support.
On a global scale, neither the US nor Japan is in a position to provide significant external stimulus.
Only the emerging and developing economies of Asia could effectively contribute to lifting global demand through a coordinated effort aimed at boosting domestic consumption, which, in turn, would stimulate additional investment.
Recent IMF experience suggests that, through appropriate coordination, private funds could be mobilized for big private-public partnership projects linking demand expansion with infrastructure investment.
In other words, a global “New Deal” – combining policies designed to achieve an orderly realignment of consumption and investment worldwide – seems to be required.
The advanced economies should promote productivity-enhancing structural reforms with renewed vigor.
The eurozone should solidify its currency union.
And the emerging and developing economies should support domestic sources of growth.
For such a deal to become possible, certain preconditions must be met.
First, international policy coordination by the G-20 must be tightened by creating a permanent secretariat to make policy proposals and recommendations concerning macroeconomic and financial developments.
The secretariat should actively cooperate with the IMF to benefit from its analysis, notably regarding exchange rates.
Second, global financial reform must proceed at a faster pace.
The financial sector requires tougher regulation, strengthened supervision, and internationally consistent resolution mechanisms to address the problems posed by very large, global institutions that are considered too big (or too complex) to fail.
Such reform is essential if the international financial system is to mediate the sizeable resource transfers that will underpin the required changes in the structure of global demand.
Finally, a new trade pact – possibly, but not necessarily, within the Doha Round – is needed to ensure the major trading powers’ access to foreign markets.
This is critically important for inspiring confidence in Asian countries, which might be persuaded to favor domestic, as opposed to external, sources of demand.
Moreover, trade liberalization will also increase consumer confidence worldwide.
The time is right for a new global settlement that targets growth, addresses crisis conditions in certain parts of the world, and rebalances the global economy to set it back on a path of strong and steady growth.
The Other Financial Crisis
NEWPORT BEACH – Two variants of financial crisis continue to wreak havoc on Western economies, fueling joblessness and poverty: the one that we read about regularly in newspapers, involving governments around the world; and a less visible one at the level of small and medium-size businesses and households.
Until both are addressed properly, the West will remain burdened by sluggish growth, persistently high unemployment, and excessive income and wealth inequality.
The sovereign-debt crisis is well known.
In order to avert a likely depression, governments around the world engaged in fiscal and monetary stimulus in the midst of the global financial crisis.
They succeeded in offsetting nasty economic dislocations caused by private-sector deleveraging, but at the cost of encumbering their fiscal balances and their central banks’ balance sheets.
While sovereign credit quality has deteriorated virtually across the board, and will most probably continue to do so, the implications for individual countries vary.
Some Western countries – such as Greece – had fragile government accounts from the outset and tipped quickly into persistent crisis mode.
There they remain, still failing to provide citizens with a light at the end of what already has been a long tunnel.
Other countries had been fiscally responsible, but were overwhelmed by the liabilities that they had assumed from others (for example, Ireland’s irresponsible banks sank their budget).
Still others, including the United States, faced no immediate threat but failed to make progress on longer-term issues.&nbsp;A few, like Germany, had built deep economic and financial resilience through years of fiscal discipline and structural reforms.
It is not surprising that policy approaches have also varied.
Indeed, they have shared only one, albeit crucial (and disappointing) feature: the inability to rely on rapid growth as the “safest” way to deleverage an over-indebted economy.
Greece essentially defaulted on some obligations.
Ireland opted for austerity and reforms, as has the United Kingdom.
The US is gradually transferring resources from creditors to debtors through financial repression.
And Germany is slowly acquiescing to a prudent relative expansion in domestic demand.
So much for the sovereign-debt crisis, which, given its national, regional, and global impact, has been particularly well covered.
After all, sovereigns are called that because they have the power to impose taxes, regulations, and, at the extreme, confiscation.
But the other credit crisis is equally consequential, and receives much less attention, even as it erodes societies’ integrity, productive capabilities, and ability to maintain living standards (particularly for the least fortunate).
I know of very few Western countries where small and medium-size companies, as well as middle-income households and those of more limited means, have not experienced a significant decline in their access to credit – not just new financing, but also the ability to roll over old credit lines and loans.
The immediate causes are well known.
They range from subdued bank lending to unusually high risk aversion, and from discredited credit vehicles to the withdrawal of some institutions from credit intermediation altogether.
Such credit constraints are one reason why unemployment rates continue to rise in so many countries – often from already alarming levels, such as 25% in Greece and Spain (where youth unemployment is above 50%) – and why unemployment remains unusually high in countries like the US (albeit it at a much lower level).
This is not just a matter of lost capabilities and rising poverty; persistently high unemployment also leads to social unrest, erosion of trust in political leaders and institutions, and the mounting risk of a lost generation.
Indeed, unemployment data in many advanced countries are dominated by long-term joblessness (usually defined as six months or more).
Skill erosion becomes a problem for those with prior work experience, while unsuccessful first-time entrants into the labor force are not just unemployed, but risk becoming unemployable.
Governments are doing too little to address the private credit debacle.
Arguably, they must first sort out the sovereign side of the crisis; but it is not clear that most officials even have a comprehensive plan.
Policy asymmetry is greatest for the countries most acutely affected by the sovereign-debt crisis.
There, the private sector has essentially been left to fend for itself; and most households and companies are struggling, thus fueling continued economic implosion.
Other countries appear to have adopted a “Field of Dreams” – also known as “build it and they will come” – approach to private credit markets, In the US, for example, artificially low interest rates for home mortgages, resulting from the Federal Reserve’s policy activism, are supposed to kick-start prudent financing.
The European Central Bank is taking a similarly indirect approach.
In both places, other policymaking entities, with much better tools at their disposal, appear either unwilling or unable to play their part.
As such, action by central banks will repeatedly fail to gain sufficient traction.
In fact, only the UK is visibly opting for a more coordinated and direct way to counter the persistent shortfalls stemming from the private part of the credit crisis.
There, the “Funding for Lending Scheme,” jointly designed by the Bank of England and the Treasury, seeks “to boost the incentive for banks and building societies to lend to UK households and non-financial companies,” while holding them accountable for proper behavior.
The UK example is important; but, given the scope and scale of the challenges, the proposal is a relatively modest one.
The program may stimulate some productive credit intermediation, but it will not make a significant dent in what will remain one of the major obstacles to robust economic recovery.
Proper access to credit for productive segments is an integral part of a well-functioning economy.
Without it, growth falters, job creation is insufficient, and widening income and wealth inequality undermines the social fabric.
That is why any comprehensive approach to restoring the advanced countries’ economic and financial vibrancy must target the proper revival of private credit flows.
Politik Beracun Versus Ekonomi yang Lebih Baik
NEW YORK – Hubungan antara politik dan ekonomi berubah.
Para politikus negara maju terkunci di dalam konflik-konflik yang aneh, sering kali beracun, dan tidak bertindak berdasarkan konsesnsus ekonomi yang berkembang mengenai bagaimana keluar dari periode yang berlarut-larut ini, yang berkaitan dengan pertumbuhan yang rendah dan tidak seimbang.
Tren ini harus diputarbalikkan, sebelum melumpuhkan dunia yang sudah maju secara struktural dan menghapus ekonomi yang sedang berkembang juga.
Jelas, pertengkaran politik bukanlah sesuatu yang baru.
Sampai baru-baru ini, ada harapan bahwa jika para ahli ekonomi profesional mencapai konsensus teknokratik mengenai pendekatan politik yang baik, maka para pemimpin politik akan mendengarkan.
Bahkan saat partai-partai politik yang lebih radikal berusaha untuk mendorong agenda yang berbeda, kekuatan-kekuatan besar – baik itu bujukan moral dari para pemerintah G7, pasar modal swasta, atau secara bersyarat bergantung pada pinjaman International Monetary Fund dan World Bank– hampir selalu pasti terlihat bahwa pendekatan konsensus akhirnya selalu unggul.
Pada tahun 1990an dan 2000an, sebagai contoh, apa yang dikenal sebagai Konsensus Washington mendominasi pembuatan keputusan di sebagian besar dunia, dan semua orang dari Amerika Serikat sampai ke gelombang besar ekonomi yang sedang berkembang yang menginginkan kebebasan perdagangan, swastanisasi, penggunaan mekanisme harga yang lebih besar, deregulasi sektor keuangan, dan reformasi fiskal dan moneter dengan penekanan yang besar pada sisi pasokan.
Pelaksanaan Konsensus Washington oleh berbagai institusi multilateral memperbesar penyebarannya, membantu meningkatkan proses globalisasi ekonomi dan keuangan yang lebih besar.
Pemerintah-pemerintah baru – khususnya pemerintahan yang dipimpin oleh gerakan-gerakan non-tradisional, yang kebangkitan kekuasannya berasal dari balik ketidakpuasan dan kefrustrasian dalam negeri atas partai-partai arus utama – terkadang tidak sepakat dengan kelayakan dan relevansi Konsensus Washington.
Namun, seperti yang ditunjukkan oleh Presiden Brazil Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva dengan kebijakan porosnya pada tahun 2002, konsensus tersebut cenderung menyebar lebih jauh. Dan hal ini terus berayun sampai sekitar dua tahun yang lalu, saat Perdana Menteri Yunani Alexis Tsipras menjalankan putar balik yang sama terkenalnya.
Namun setelah bertahun-tahun pertumbuhan yang rendah dan terlihat jelas tidak inklusif, konsensus tersebut mulai menurun.
Para warga negara negara maju frustasi dengan “kemapanan” – termasuk “para ahli” ekonomi, para pemimpin politik arus utama, dan perusahaan-perusahaan multinasional yang dominan – yang terus-menerus mereka salahkan atas penderitaan ekonomi mereka.
Berbagai gerakan dan tokoh anti-kemapanan secara cepat menangkap frustasi ini, menggunakan retorik yang membakar dan bahkan agresif untuk memenangkan dukungan.
Mereka bahkan tidak perlu memenangkan pemilihan umun untuk mengganggu mekanisme transmisi antara ekonomi dan politik.
Kerajaan Inggris menunjukkan bahwa pada bulan Juni, dengan voting Brexit-nya --- sebuah keputusan yang secara langsung membelokkan konsensus ekonomi luas yang ada di Uni Eropa  adalah berdasarkan kepentingan terbaik Inggris.
Referendum tersebut terjadi karena satu alasan: pada tahun 2013, Perdana Menteri saat itu, David Cameron, takut bahwa ia tidak akan mampu mengamankan suara dari basis Partai Konservatif dalam pemilihan umum tahun tersebut.
Sumber dari ketakutan Cameron?
Gangguan politik dari Partai Independen Inggris –sebuah partai anti kemapanan yang akhirnya hanya memenangkan satu kursi di Parlemen dan akhirnya sekara tidak punya pemimpin dan sedang bergejolak.
Sekarang, nampaknya, bendungan sudah terbuka.
Di dalam konferensi tahunan Partai Konservatif, pidato dari Perdana Menteri Teresa May dan anggota-anggota kabinetnya menunjukkan keinginan untuk melakukan “Brexit keras,” yang akhirnya melucuti pengaturan-pengaturan perdagangan yang telah berguna selama ini bagi ekonomi menereka.
Mereka juga memasukkan serangan terhadap “elit internasional” dan kritik dari kebijakan-kebijakan Bank of England yang penting dalam menstabilisasi ekonomi Inggris seketika setelah referendum terjadi—ini memberikan pemerintah May waktu untuk membentuk strategi Brexit yang utuh.
Berbagai ekonomi berkembang lainnya mengalami perkembangan politik yang mirip.
Di Jerman, keberadaan Alternative für Deutschland, sebuah partai yang sangat kanan, yang keberadaannya dalam beberapa pemilihan umum pusat secara mencengangkan kuat, tampak sudah mempengaruhi perilaku pemerintah.
Di Amerika Serikat, bahkan kampanye Donald Trump untuk menjadi presiden gagal untuk menaruh seorang Republikan balik lagi ke Gedung Putih (seperti yang makin terlihat, di dalam kejadian akhir-akhir ini dari kampanyenya yang sangat tidak biasa, banyak pemimpin Republikan yang telah meninggalkan nominasi partai mereka tersebut), pencalonannya sebagai presiden akan meninggalkan dampak berkepanjangan dalam politik Amerika.
Jika tidak diatur dengan baik, referendum Italia berdasarkan Undang-Undang pada bulan Desember –sebuah gagasan yang beresiko dari Perdana Menteri Matteo Renzi untuk menyatukan dukugnan – dapat berbahaya, seperti yang dilakukan oleh Cameron, menyebabkan gangguan politik dan meremehkan tindakan yang efektif untuk mengatasi tantangan-tantangan ekonomi negara tersebut.
Jangan salah: pilihan-pilihan kebijakan yang solid dan meyakinkan itu ada.
Setelah kinerja ekonomi yang biasa-biasa saja selama bertahun-tahun, ada persetuhuan yang berkembang bahwa gerakan menjauh dari ketergantungan yang berlebihan terhadap kebijakan moneter yang tidak konvensional dibutuhkan.
Seperti yang dikatakan  oleh Managing Director IMF Christine Lagarde, “bank-bank sentral tidak boleh menjadi satu-satunya permainan yang ada.”
Namun, bank-bank sentral masih menjadi satu-satunya permainan yang ada.
Seperti argumen saya di The Only Game in Town, yang diterbitkan pada bulan Januari, negara-negara membutuhkan pendekatan kebijakan yang lebih komprehensif, yang melibatkan reformasi struktural yang pro terhadap pertumbuhan, manajemen permintaan yang lebih seimbang (termasuk pembelanjaan fiskal yang lebih besar dalam infrastruktur), dan arsitektur serta koordinasi kebijakan lintas batas yang lebih baik.
Ada juga sebuah kebutuhan, yang dicontohkan oleh krisis Yunani yang berkepanjangan, untuk mengatasi kantong-kantong keberhutangan yang berlebihan, yang dapat menyebabkan dampak yang menghancurkan, melebihi mereka yang telah terkena dampaknya.
Munculnya konsensus-konsensus baru dalam hal-hal tersebut adalah berita baik.
Namun, dalam lingkungan politik saat ini, menerjemahkan konsensus tersebut menjadi tindakan akan terjadi dengan lambat, dengan cara yang terbaik.
Resikonya adalah, seperti halnya politik yang buruk menghasilkan ekonomi yang baik, kemarahan dan frustasi populer akan muncul, meracuni politik lagi.
Satu harapan yang menggarisbawahi kepemimpinan politik mengambil kendali waktu untuk membuat koreksi-koreksi di tengah-tengah proses terjadi secara suka rela, sebelum tanda-tanda krisis ekonomi dan keuangan memaksa para pembuat keputusan sibuk meminimalisasi kerusakan.
A Rest Stop for Europe
PRINCETON – Last week, in a highly anticipated speech, German President Joachim Gauck cautioned against the blind pursuit of an “ever-closer” European Union, acknowledging that the growing inequality among member states is generating “a sense of unease, even unmistakable anger,” and increasing the risk of national humiliation.
He pointed out that, in addition to the economic crisis, there is “a crisis of confidence in Europe as a political project.”
While Gauck made clear that he remains decidedly pro-Europe, he highlighted the need for closer reflection about Europe’s future – and especially that of the eurozone.
Standing on the verge of greater integration, Europeans are hesitant, “unsure whether we should really stride out on the onward journey.”
Addressing this hesitation, he declared, will require a thoughtful, nuanced understanding of what “more Europe” actually means.
Gauck may not have gone far enough: At this point, an ever-closer union may be a political mirage.
Any meaningful progress toward stabilizing the eurozone would require a significant – potentially open-ended – financial commitment, and the EU is not politically ready to cross that threshold.
Repeatedly pretending to move forward, then pulling back at the critical point, exacerbates political uncertainty and economic vulnerability.
Rather than indecisively pursuing more unity, this may be the moment to restore effective sovereignty to national authorities in eurozone countries.
Such a move would alleviate anxiety in the short term, thereby giving Europeans the opportunity to regroup in preparation for future steps toward a more integrated Europe and a more resilient euro.
To this end, eurozone leaders must take three key steps.
The dysfunctional system of European fiscal governance should be dismantled; fiscal responsibility should be returned to member states; and, to minimize the risk of excessive future lending, private lenders should be required to bear the losses implied by unsustainable sovereign debt.
The case against European fiscal governance is straightforward.
Before the crisis, the single-minded emphasis on reducing national budget deficits to less than 3% of GDP led to extensive abuse.
Either the target was openly flouted, as it was in leading economies like Germany and France, or the data were manipulated to obscure problems (a common practice throughout the eurozone, not just in Greece).
And the belief in economic growth as a fiscal panacea led to unrealistically optimistic GDP forecasts.
When the crisis struck, the 3% deficit target became the focal point for unrelenting austerity – a form of what anthropologist Clifford Geertz described as “involution,” which occurs when a process intensifies rather than changes in response to external or internal pressure.
In other words, EU leaders began to complicate fiscal governance, ultimately creating an inefficient, inescapable labyrinth of regulation and bureaucracy.
As fiscal metrics become increasingly intricate, monitoring efforts will become ever easier to undermine.
The case for returning fiscal responsibility to national authorities is also strong – and not only because centralized fiscal authority has proved to be so inefficient.
With citizens of distressed countries bearing the fiscal burden of the crisis, the enduring presumption that they will not act responsibly is patronizing, at best.
And the current strategy of exchanging goodies for good behavior encourages game-playing and dilutes responsibility.
While the risk that governments will succumb to fiscal temptation remains, citizens’ current suffering is likely to deter future excesses.
National fiscal sovereignty would facilitate the final crucial step: building a more mature relationship with private lenders.
The eurozone was founded on the “no bailout” principle: if member states could not repay their debts, lenders would bear the losses.
But lenders chose – correctly, as it turned out – to disregard that threat.
Instead of enforcing the no-bailout principle and establishing a precedent, debtor countries used official loans to repay private creditors.
As a result, these countries have condemned themselves to continued austerity, low growth, and high debt, while diminishing any future incentive for private lenders to impose fiscal discipline on sovereign borrowers.
Only by shifting the burden of responsibility back onto private lenders can debtor countries escape this quagmire.
In the United States, each state is responsible for its fiscal management, without being forced to comply with a single, overarching template.
The states are not regulated by the federal government; they are disciplined by the knowledge that no one will repay their debts for them.
And the system seems to work: entering the crisis, US states had significantly lower deficit and debt ratios than the eurozone’s vulnerable member states.
So far, European integration has largely been a process of “falling forward,” with each stumble serving as a lesson from which a stronger union emerges.
But, while this uncertain approach may suffice as a basis for declarations of good intentions, it does not inspire the confidence required for countries to make the profound financial commitment that is now needed.
Europeans should have the chance to regain their footing.
Transferring fiscal responsibility back to national authorities would not only mean the end of counterproductive efforts to manage fiscal affairs centrally; it would also diminish the sense of frustration and lack of control that is fueling Euro-skepticism.
In short, taking a step back would provide an opportunity to reset, to reflect, and to plot the best course toward a more stable, more integrated Europe.
For a fiscal union to function – however unlikely that outcome may be – a solid foundation is crucial.
As Gauck explained, Europeans “are pausing to… equip [themselves] both intellectually and emotionally for the next step, which will require [them] to enter uncharted territory.”
Giving Europeans the time and space to choose more Europe would reinforce the core values upon which integration has rested for more than six decades.
Continuing to stumble forward, however, would inevitably lead to a debilitating, if not fatal, fall.
A European Cure for Balkan Depression
VIENNA – European politics is mostly shaped by events and anniversaries.
But while events are often unforeseeable, anniversaries are not.
Five years from now, Europe will be reflecting on the 100th anniversary of the outbreak of World War 1, which led to a loss of life almost without parallel and set in motion a chain of events that led to the creation of Europe as we now know it.
World leaders may have already reserved some days in August 2014 to mark the occasion.
It is easy to predict that Sarajevo will be the place where they will meet to look back on Europe’s savage twentieth century.
But how will Sarajevo look in five years?
Will it still be the capital of a country whose citizens view the future bleakly and whose politicians have totally lost touch with the electorate?
Or is there a hope that European leaders will use the anniversary to announce the successful integration of the remaining Balkan countries into the European Union?
A Balkan Monitor survey recently conducted by Gallup Europe gives suggests the state of public opinion in Serbia, Montenegro, Macedonia, Albania, Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Kosovo 20 years on from the fall of the Berlin Wall and a decade after the end of the Kosovo war.
The findings seem to indicate that the next five years will be a make-or-break period for the region’s future development.
While the overwhelming majority of citizens are convinced that further armed conflict in the region is unlikely, the public’s mood – with the exception of Kosovars and Albanians – is pessimistic.
The future promises peace without development.
Trust in political elites and in national and European institutions has been steadily declining.
The majority of citizens have experienced a decline in living standards in the last year, and there remains a perception that people have more opportunities outside their own countries.
Pessimism about employment is alarmingly high among young people, while corruption and government mismanagement are regarded as being widespread.
All those who have made it their job to praise the stability in the region should look at these figures.
Indeed, it is striking that the majority of citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina believe that their leaders are not interested in their country joining the EU.
An absolute majority of citizens in each of the surveyed countries are convinced that their country is heading in the wrong direction.
Less than one in 10 Croats (whose country could be joining the EU in the near future) believes that their country is heading in the right direction.
There are now two options for the region: one is a “shock integration” program that takes all of the Western Balkan states into the EU; the other is a journey into the unknown.
The hope that these countries can muddle through on their own is a dangerous illusion.
Stability alone can no longer be the EU’s only objective in the region.
The EU’s continuing presence as a colonial power in places like Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo could cause even more problems in the future, especially if benefits are not forthcoming.
In particular, a delay in Serbia’s integration into the EU could bring Tito-inspired fantasies to the heart of the country’s foreign and security policy.
Thus, demoralization of Balkan society creates a dynamic of its own when the best and the brightest see their future outside of their own countries and where “stability” is just another name for political and economic stagnation.
If European leaders do plan to meet in 2014 in Sarajevo, they should act now.
The ratification of the Lisbon Treaty allows for an element of visionary realism in European politics, as there are no longer any institutional obstacles to the future enlargement of the EU.
Today, unlike a year ago, we know how many states are in the Balkans, and the Balkan Monitor results show that all of them want to join the Union.
What the EU has learned from the results of the last parliamentary elections in Bulgaria is that, contrary to conventional wisdom, the leverage of Brussels over new member states increases rather than diminishes after they join.
The EU’s decision to liberalize its visa regime for Serbia, Montenegro, and Macedonia – and the fact that George Papandreou, the major architect of the EU’s Balkan integration strategy, is back in power in Greece – is another source of optimism.
But it is now or never for the Balkans.
Visa liberalization can be a strategic step in the direction of “shock integration,” but if it is not followed by bold political action from the EU, it could merely become a re-packaging of the status quo .
In short, the moment has arrived for shaping events instead of simply marking anniversaries.
Closing Europe’s Strategy Gap
MADRID – The ongoing crisis in Ukraine has been a hot topic of analysis for almost a year.
But one question has largely escaped thorough examination: what Russia’s annexation of Crimea and invasion of eastern Ukraine indicates about the European Union’s foreign policy.
During the early stages of the crisis, Germany, which had bet heavily on Russia’s modernization, was averse to taking any consequential action.
But, as the crisis deepened, German Chancellor Angela Merkel worked to persuade her European counterparts to implement a broad and biting sanctions regime.
This certainly was a step in the right direction, but it did nothing to address the foreign-policy failings that helped spark the Ukrainian crisis and continue to undermine Europe’s response – namely, the EU’s misguided Neighborhood Policy (ENP) and its muddled approach to energy.
On both of these fronts, the EU’s lack of strategic vision has created the impression that Europe is repeatedly being outmaneuvered by Russian President Vladimir Putin.
It increasingly appears that Ukraine is becoming locked in a “frozen conflict” – Russia’s foreign-policy specialty.
Indeed, the situation in Ukraine represents a tactical victory for Russia, with the fragile but enduring ceasefire – and accompanying legislation that grants Donetsk and Luhansk considerable political autonomy – allowing Russia to entrench the conflict near the EU’s border.
Moreover, the delayed implementation of key elements of the EU’s association agreement with Ukraine is clear evidence that, at the moment, Russia dictates the terms of EU-Ukrainian engagement.
In Europe, the Kremlin has been able to pursue a successful divide-and-rule strategy, particularly in view of Hungary’s decision to suspend gas flows to Ukraine.
Prime Minister Viktor Orbán’s government, whose behavior in recent years has been at odds with the EU’s criteria for democracy, now openly approves of authoritarian regimes – and Putin’s, in particular – with serious potential consequences for European unity.
Nonetheless, the timing of the current ceasefire, which coincides with the installation of a new EU Commission, is advantageous, as is Putin’s shortsighted emphasis on tactical victories.
EU leaders should take advantage of the break in the fighting to stop reacting and start anticipating.
With a long-term strategic vision, the EU could overwhelm and ultimately undermine Putin’s short-term successes.
Such a vision must include a reconceptualization of the ENP.
The program’s mission – to help guide the political, social, and economic transitions of neighboring states – is not inherently problematic; the problem lies in the way that the mission has been interpreted and pursued.
For starters, the ENP assumes that all of the EU’s neighbors, both in the south and in the east, ultimately want to realize European values and structures in their own countries.
In other words, the ENP does not account for the developmental, cultural, and aspirational differences among the EU’s partner countries.
The ENP suffers operationally from its excessively technical approach and lack of strategic vision.
For example, before the Ukraine crisis, the European Commission was so focused on negotiating the technical features of the association agreement that it did not consider adequately the potential fallout of the process – such as, say, a response from Russia.
To be sure, the EU recognized its need for a coherent strategy, and attempted to resolve it by establishing the European External Action Service and the position of High Representative for Foreign Affairs.
But the EEAS ended up in a turf war with the European Commission, and outgoing High Representative Catherine Ashton did little to ease the tension, owing to her unwillingness to involve herself in intra-EU disagreements.
It is telling that Ashton has made progress exclusively in areas defined by ample consensus, such as the negotiations on Iran’s nuclear program and the pact between Kosovo and Serbia.
Further eroding Europe’s effectiveness is its fragmented approach to securing energy supplies.
With every country largely controlling its own energy policy, Europe’s energy market has become inefficient and excessively dependent on Russian supplies.
To the extent that there has been an EU-wide energy strategy, it has related to renewables, rather than the intersection of geopolitics and energy security.
But there is reason for hope.
The new Commission, which its president, Jean Claude Juncker, has restructured significantly, could provide Europe with the strategic leadership it so badly needs.
In fact, Juncker has already expressed a desire to integrate incoming High Representative Federica Mogherini into the Commission’s policy program.
The new structure – which tasks Mogherini with guiding and coordinating the work of multiple commissioners, including those responsible for trade, the ENP, and climate and energy – should strengthen the coherence and direction of EU policies, particularly after Mogherini completes her European Council-mandated assessment of the global strategic landscape.
But a restructured Commission is not enough to ensure a reset of Europe’s foreign-policy strategy.
For that to happen, Mogherini must assert herself as a leader, backed by Juncker and the new European Council president, Donald Tusk.
And, most important, all EU member states must recommit themselves to cooperation.
The Ukrainian people have demonstrated the power of Europe’s values.
Indeed, Europe has a large set of tools at its disposal; it just needs to figure out how to use them.
If it can, it will be better able to respond not only to the Russian challenge, but also to many of the other challenges that characterize today’s rapidly shifting global environment.
A Europe of Women?
PARIS – Are women in Europe on the verge of becoming an engine for political change?
In economic-development circles, experience and common sense suggest that progress, accountability, and hard work start with and depend on women.
Micro-credits, for example, are much more efficient when women receive and repay them.
Perhaps because they bear children and must find the means to feed them, women are now perceived as the best and most determined “agents of change.”
That seems to be as true now of European politics as it has been of economics in parts of Africa and Asia.
The results of Italy’s recent municipal elections could be a signal of an incipient electoral dynamic: it was women who voted Silvio Berlusconi’s party out of power in Milan, a city that he has long controlled (and the original seat of his power).
No direct link exists between that result and the dramatic Dominique Strauss-Kahn scandal in New York, but in the immediate aftermath of DSK’s arrest, Italian women and young voters decisively mobilized to defeat Berlusconi’s party (led in Milan, ironically, by a woman).
These voters could no longer stand the combination of machismo and vulgarity that had once served so well the man Italian humorists now call “Berlus-Kahn.”
When Berlusconi first came to power 17 years ago, he had the support of a majority of women.
They were not discouraged by his ambivalent perception of them (by turns celebrating their traditional domesticity and glorifying their sexual objectification).
But Italian society has changed: most women are now working, and they are no longer willing to accept Belusconi’s anachronistic and outrageous chauvinism.
Italian men may pity the aging, isolated leader, who looks increasingly like his wax effigy at Madame Tussaud’s.
But Italian women (indeed, women everywhere, it seems) feel only anger and humiliation over a man so obsessed with himself, his various criminal trials, and his vulgar pleasures that he appears to them to have no purpose left except to remain in power as long as possible.
Women, of course, are not alone in their opposition to Berlusconi, but they made the difference in Milan.
They are the incarnation of modernity, animated by a yearning for simple dignity and respect.
They are not alone in the vanguard of a new Europe of women.
As Iceland spiraled into bankruptcy, owing the irresponsible behavior of its mostly male political and financial elites, the people of Iceland decided that only a strong and responsible woman could redress the country’s problems.
So they elected one as President.
The depth and gravity of the current economic and social crisis in countries like Greece, Portugal, and Spain present women with a new opportunity.
Confronted with what many of them perceive as the equivalent of an “economic war,” women are playing an increasingly important role in maintaining their families’ financial security.
And the more widespread this becomes, the more women will seek a political role that reflects their economic clout.
Of course, women’s changing status may not translate immediately into growing political influence.
And the rest of Europe might never follow the example of Scandinavia, where gender equality has advanced much further than anywhere else.
But such a dynamic does now seem to be in motion.
Similarly, regardless of the outcome of DSK’s trial in New York, the case might represent a turning point in the treatment of women in Europe.
Public and private displays of atavistic machismo, one hopes, will no longer be considered acceptable.
In the Arab world, too, from Tunis to Cairo, young women have played an important role in the revolutionary process.
Their appetite for change – understandable, given the treatment of women in traditional Muslim societies – appears to be one of the main causes underlying the force of the revolutionary impulse in Tunisia and Egypt.
None of this is to argue that “women” are a universal force for positive change in Europe and around the world.
Consider, for example, Marine Le Pen, the new head of France’s National Front, Elena Ceaucescu, the sordid wife of the former Romanian dictator, or, more recently, Tunisian ex-President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali’s wife, Leila Trabelsi, who fled to Dubai with 1.5 tons of gold plundered from the central bank.
The point, simply, is that with so many people in so many countries demanding far-reaching change, the politics of gender is very much in play – in Europe and beyond.
The main question is whether the growing number of women in politics will deliver the different perspectives and modes of leadership that many voters (or protesters) now seem to crave.
A Euro Sabbatical
MUNICH – Under substantial external pressure, the eurozone’s crisis-hit countries are, at long last, bringing themselves to make painful cuts in their government budgets.
Salaries are being slashed and public employees sacked to reduce new borrowing to a tolerable level.
And yet, competitiveness in Greece and Portugal, in particular, is not improving.
The latest Eurostat figures on the evolution of the price index for self-produced goods (GDP deflator) show no tendency whatsoever in the crisis-stricken countries towards real devaluation. But real devaluation, achieved by lowering prices vis-à-vis their eurozone competitors, is the only way to re-establish these countries’ competitiveness.
A reduction in unit labor costs can also increase competitiveness only to the extent that it actually results in price reductions.
After all, it was price inflation in the crisis countries, fueled by massive inflows of cheap credit following the introduction of the euro, that resulted in their loss of competitiveness, ballooning current-account deficits, and accumulation of enormous foreign debt.
Now that capital markets are no longer willing to finance these deficits, prices should be going into reverse, but this, obviously, is not happening.
This internal devaluation is paying off: while Ireland was still running a current-account deficit of 5.6% of GDP in 2008, the European Commission expects the outturn for 2011 to have been a 0.7%-of-GDP current-account surplus.
True, much of this is mere debt-service relief, given that Ireland was able to repay its foreign liabilities with self-printed money, for which it pays only 1% interest.
However, Ireland’s big trade surplus did improve further.
Ireland owes much of this turnaround to its efficient export sector, whose supporters were able to enforce a political U-turn.
Greece, on the other hand, is under the influence of a strong import lobby.
As the Greek economics minister, Michalis Chrysochoidis, has said, this is attributable to European Union subsidies, which drove entrepreneurs to follow the easy money into the import sector.
Now these importers form a powerful bulwark against any policy that causes deflation, even though lowering prices – and thereby redirecting Greek demand from foreign to domestic products and helping tourism – is the only way to put the Greek economy back on its feet.
Since Greece’s current-account deficit as a share of GDP was three times higher than Ireland’s, Greek prices would have to fall by about half to achieve the same kind of success.
It is inconceivable that Greece could manage that within the eurozone without widespread social unrest, if not conditions approaching those of civil war.
But it isn’t just importers who are blocking real devaluation. Unions, too, are resisting the necessary wage reductions, and public and private debtors fear the prospect of insolvency if their assets and revenues are assessed at a lower value, while their debts remain unchanged.
The situation is intractable.
Many people regard debt relief and socialization of debts as the only way out.
This help has been given.
The recent agreement gave Greece relief of €237 billion ($316 billion), about 30% more than Greece’s net national income of roughly €180 billion euros.But such help only entrenches the wrong prices – and thus the economy’s lack of competitiveness.
The debts will re-emerge like a tumor, growing year by year, while undermining the creditworthiness of stable eurozone countries.
If that happened, the euro would eventually collapse.
Only a price reduction would create current-account surpluses and enable the crisis countries to pay off their foreign debts.
It is time for Europe to come to terms with this remorseless truth.
Those crisis countries that do not want to take it upon themselves to lower their prices should be given the opportunity to leave the eurozone temporarily in order to devalue prices and debts.
In other words, they should take a kind of euro sabbatical – a proposal that has now also been taken up by American economist Kenneth Rogoff.
After the ensuing financial thunderstorm died down, the sun would come out again very quickly.
The creditor countries would have to shoulder big losses from write-downs, but they would still end up with more than they would have gotten had the crisis countries remained within the eurozone, because these countries’ new prosperity, gained by leaving, offers the only chance of recovering any assets at all.
A Fair Deal for Turkey
Turkey has been given what looks like an ultimatum from the EU Commission: open your ports for ships from Cyprus within a month, or you may risk a halt to the EU accession talks now underway.
At the same time, the Commission’s latest report on Turkey’s progress toward accession notes that political reforms have slowed down, further calling into question the country’s future EU membership.
The Commission’s progress report will be dealt with by the European Council next month.
At that meeting, European leaders should ask themselves the following questions: Has the EU given Turkey a fair deal in the case of Cyprus?
Has the EU’s behavior been consistent in supporting political reform in Turkey?
What are the EU’s long-term interests vis-à-vis Turkey?
If the answers to the first two questions are “no” – as I believe they are – the third question becomes vitally important.
True, Turkey has closed its ports to ships from (Greek) Cyprus, and this is a violation of agreements.
But it is also true that the northern Turkish part of Cyprus is denied access to free trade and other benefits from EU-membership.
This is because Cyprus remains a divided island.
It was assumed that Cyprus should be united when the country joined the EU in 2004.
A United Nations plan for unification was accepted by the Turkish part.
But the Greek Cypriots voted against the plan because their leaders did not live up to the implicit deal with the EU to support it.
Nevertheless, Cyprus became an EU member – but only the Greek part.
This was clearly a mistake, because it made the EU part of the conflict.
It gave Greek Cypriot leaders the possibility of blocking progress in negotiations between the EU and Turkey.
So how can Turkey under these conditions maintain confidence in the EU’s fairness?
Political and legal reforms in Turkey in recent years have been remarkably far-reaching, for they have clearly been spurred by Turks’ wish to move closer to the EU.
But Turkish public support for EU membership has fallen dramatically as Turks have grown to feel that they are not being given a fair deal.
This has given new strength to those who want Turkey to develop in another direction, towards a more Islamic society instead of a modern secular state.
Therefore, the recent lack of progress in Turkey’s reform process can to a large extent be explained by the EU’s behavior.
This leaves us with the third question: what kind of Turkey does the EU want?
There should be no doubt about the answer: it is clearly in the EU’s interest to see Turkey’s democracy and economy continue to strengthen.
More than 40 years ago, it was promised that once Turkey lives up to the preconditions for membership, it will be welcome in the EU.
It is high time that European leaders take this promise seriously.
It is a sad fact that a large majority of voters in the EU are against Turkish membership.
But they are reacting to the current situation.
When they are asked if they would like a reformed Turkey as a partner – a Turkey that lives up fully to the conditions for membership described in the Copenhagen Criteria (democracy, rule of law, respect for human rights, and an effective market economy) – many more are inclined to say yes.
European leaders must therefore take up two challenges.
First, they should say clearly to their own voters that the EU must live up to its promises to Turkey, and that this is in the larger interest of all Europeans.
Second, they should give Turkey a fair deal in the negotiations.
The first litmus test on European leadership concerns the practical problem of access to harbors.
Here the Finns, who chair the EU right now, have taken an initiative to implement a pragmatic solution that takes into consideration both sides in the conflict.
The Finnish initiative should be given strong support from all European leaders.
At the same time, a new effort should be made to bring life to the UN’s proposals regarding Cyprus.
If this means putting pressure on some actors within the EU’s own ranks, so be it.
A Farewell to (Glorious) War
In recent days, Italy’s government fell after losing a parliamentary vote on the country’s troop deployment in Afghanistan, while Britain and Denmark announced that they are to begin withdrawing their troops from Iraq.
Whereas the Bush administration is deploying an additional 21,000 American soldiers in Iraq, and is pushing for more allied troops in Afghanistan, America’s allies are rejecting its Middle East policy.
They are increasingly convinced that “victory” will be elusive in any asymmetric conflict between states, however powerful, and religiously driven armed insurgents.
Donald Rumsfeld’s dogma of military “transformation” – the technological upgrading of an army’s capacity to enable decisive victory with fewer troops – failed resoundingly in Iraq.
Nor could Israel, with its overwhelming technological advantage, defeat Hezbollah in Lebanon.
More rockets and missiles fell on northern Israel in 33 days than hit Britain during all of World War II.
So the Israelis now must reckon with an entirely new phenomenon: an asymmetric entity, Hezbollah, with nation-state firepower.
So the fierce debate over whether to increase the size of American ground forces in Iraq is beside the point.
Neither the Soviet experience in Afghanistan in the 1980’s nor NATO’s today vindicates the claim that troop numbers are what matter most on the modern battlefield.
When geo-strategic military front lines are non-existent, as in Kosovo, Afghanistan, and Iraq, mass no longer equals victory.
The great military thinker Carl von Clausewitz’s notion of “decisive battles” as the “center of gravity” of war is simply irrelevant to conflicts that have no visible “center of gravity.”
Indeed, while wars from the time of Hannibal’s defeat of the Romans in 216 B.C. to the Gulf War of 1991 had this center of gravity, with a massive concentration of force capable of bringing an enemy to its knees, such industrial inter-state wars have now become an historical anachronism.
Most states nowadays lie within borders that are widely accepted as legitimate, and they increasingly abide by international norms of behavior in times of war.
In fact, the obligation of states to abide by humanitarian rules of conduct while their enemies are free to barbarize warfare is what makes asymmetric wars especially insoluble.
Moreover, in an era of global media and international war crimes courts, the criteria for states’ use of military force have become more complex than ever.
Inter-state combat may still occur where strategic front lines can be found, such as Israel’s border with Syria, India’s border with Pakistan, and the border dividing the two Koreas.
In such cases, war, as the Egyptians showed in 1973, might still serve as an avenue to resolving a conflict.
The Syrians might be tempted to launch an offensive against Israel with the objective of breaking the deadlock over the future of the Golan Heights.
However, in the case of Kashmir, the asymmetric conflict currently fought by proxies and terrorist groups might not degenerate into all-out war precisely because India and Pakistan have mutual nuclear deterrence.
This changing nature of the battlefield essentially means that war as a conclusive event in an international conflict has become obsolete.
The facile Clausewitzian wisdom that military action ultimately leads to a political solution is no longer convincing.
“Victory” cannot bring peace, simply because there will always be a war after the war.
Thus, for example, the conventional war in Kosovo lasted for two months, only to usher in a six-year asymmetric conflict.
Likewise, America’s three-week “shock and awe” campaign in Iraq in 2003 ended in “victory,” but opened the gates of hell for occupiers and ordinary Iraqis alike.
And six months after the merciless pounding of southern Lebanon, Hezbollah is as strong as it was before.
Nor does the return of the Taliban in Afghanistan six years after their overthrow now seen too far-fetched.
It is during the war after the war that the occupier’s inferiority is revealed, with constant reinforcements increasing the number of targets for the insurgents far more quickly than the occupier can adapt to the changing battlefield.
The insurgents in Iraq, as the British admit, were able in just three years to cope with their enemies’ technological superiority in a way that the IRA in Northern Ireland was unable to do in 30 years.
The Iraq war and Israel’s wars with Hamas and Hezbollah show the limits of what military power can achieve, as well as vindicate diplomacy and conflict resolution.
When it comes to tackling complex political and cultural conflicts, forging international and regional alliances around a legitimate objective is more important than sheer military capacity.
That said, it would be dangerously naïve to believe that the exercise of power and the capacity to intimidate are unnecessary.
But the objectives of the use of force need to be linked to the recognition that in today’s asymmetric conflicts, victory is no longer achieved on the battlefield.
Only better-informed foreign policies that can address the genuine anxieties of civilizations in crisis will yield more sustainable results.
Affirmative Action for Europe
The violence in France, fueled by staggering unemployment and ruthless policing, reflects the utter failure of the French model of social integration.
But violence elsewhere in Europe, such as the London bombings of July and the brutal murder of Dutch filmmaker Theo van Gogh on the streets of Amsterdam in November 2004, had already made Europe’s failure to integrate its minorities painfully clear.
As the riots in France fade, French politicians are agonizing about how to proceed.
Forty years ago, after legal segregation of blacks and whites formally ended in America, the United States was confronted by similar problems.
America’s response shows, however, that integration cannot be viewed as a one-way street.
In addition to imposing demands and constraints on minorities to join the mainstream, society must be willing to demand of itself that it make room for all its citizens.
As a potential model to be followed, Europe should look at the so-called “affirmative action” policies that America enacted to provide opportunities to blacks.
Affirmative action, or “positive discrimination,” as some have called these policies, began with university admissions.
But, in the early 1970’s, President Richard M. Nixon expanded the scope of affirmative action.
As a result, ethnicity began to be weighed as a positive factor not only in university admissions, but also in public procurement decisions, credit facilities for small enterprises, and government hiring.
The rational for affirmative action in those early years was the fact that, after a long history of systemic injustice, merely outlawing discrimination based on race or gender would not ensure equal opportunity for all.
Such programs are often viewed as contradicting a basic American value, namely that admissions, lending, and hiring decisions should be based on the merits of the individual, not group distinctions.
But they remain in existence three decades later.
Indeed, leading American companies, like General Motors, General Electric, and Walmart, have created affirmative action programs for hiring and selecting suppliers at their own initiative.
Similarly, anchormen and anchorwomen from all ethnic backgrounds populate American television news programs.
In France, by contrast, the appointment of the black anchorwoman Audrey Pulvar was big news on its own, because most of her colleagues in France are white.
Affirmative action programs, of course, have always been vulnerable to attack by those who can’t benefit from them.
In 2003, a white student asked the US Supreme Court to declare that the use of race in the University of Michigan’s admission policies violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment of the US Constitution.
The Supreme Court, however, ruled that the program was constitutional, citing a “compelling state interest” in racial diversity.
“Effective participation by members of all racial and ethnic groups in the civil life of our nation,” the court said, “is essential if the dream of one nation, indivisible, is to be realized.”
In reaching its decision, the Supreme Court took into account a legal brief submitted by 60 major American businesses, led by General Motors, asking that affirmative action be upheld.
They argued that the skills needed in today’s global marketplace can only be developed through exposure to a wide diversity of people.
Retired military officers and commanders told the court that affirmative action was essential to maintaining an integrated officer corps.
What America’s affirmative action programs may not do is set quotas for minorities, as this prevents competition between different groups.
But, in comparing groups, it is permitted to use an individual’s status as member of an under-represented minority in his or her favor.
As a result, a university may select a black student with a satisfactory score on the admissions test, even if there is a white student with a better score.
From the current French viewpoint, however, laws and regulations based on ethnicity are regarded as an unwelcome encroachment on the Republican ideal.
French President Jacques Chirac vehemently opposes quotas for immigrants, out of fear that such a policy would stigmatize groups.
And French businesses don’t see it as their role to solve the problems of the suburbs.
Moreover, French Interior Minister Nicolas Sarkozy hasn’t done much except hand out some special grants to the smartest immigrants from the suburbs.
France does have affirmative action programs, but they address poverty, not ethnicity.
If European politicians are serious about preventing a schism between population groups, affirmative action is essential – not only at the workplace, but also for small business loans, home loans, public procurement, and school admissions.
Tony Blair, who in July was faced with the shortcomings of integration in the UK, should take advantage of the country’s current presidency of the European Union to make affirmative action programs the top priority at next month’s summit of European government leaders in Brussels.
Affordable Green Energy
COPENHAGEN – Public skepticism about global warming may be growing, but the scientific consensus is as solid as ever: man-made climate change is real, and we ignore it at our peril.
But if that issue is settled (and it should be), there is an equally large and important question that remains wide open: what should we do about it?
One prescription that is bandied about with increasing frequency certainly sounds sensible: the world should drastically cut the amount of greenhouse gases that it pumps into the atmosphere each day.
Specifically, we are told, the goal should be a 50% reduction in global carbon-dioxide emissions by the middle of the century.
Even its backers concede that achieving this target won’t be easy – and they are right.
In fact, they are so right that they are wrong.
Allow me to explain.
Our dependency on carbon-emitting fuels is more than enormous.
It is overwhelming.
For all the talk about solar, wind, and other hyped green-energy sources, they make up only 0.6% of global energy consumption. Renewable energy overwhelmingly comes from often-unsustainable burning of wood and biomass by people in the Third World.
Fossil fuels account for more than four-fifths of the world’s energy diet.
So, in order to cut global carbon emissions in half by the middle of the century, we would obviously have to start getting a lot more of our energy from sources that don’t emit carbon.
Can we do this?
According to the International Energy Agency, here’s what it would take to achieve the goal of cutting emissions by 50% between now and mid-century:
30 new nuclear plants; 17,000 windmills; 400 biomass power plants;Two hydroelectric facilities the size of China’s massive Three Gorges Dam; and42 coal and gas power plants with yet-to-be-developed carbon-capture technology.Now consider this: this list does not describe what we would have to build between now and 2050, but what we would have to build each and every year until then!
One more thing: even if we managed to do all this (which we obviously cannot), the impact on global temperatures would be hardly noticeable by 2050.
According to the best-known climate-economic model, this vast undertaking would likely wind up reducing global temperatures by just one-tenth of one degree centigrade (one-fifth of one degree Fahrenheit), while holding back sea-level rises by only one centimeter (less than half an inch).
That’s not a lot of bang for the buck.
Indeed, the projected costs of this approach – some $5 trillion annually by mid-century – are so much greater than its likely benefits that it makes no sense to call it a solution at all.
Fortunately, there is a better, smarter way to deal with global warming.
What if, instead of spending trillions of dollars trying to build an impossible number of power plants – or, more likely, condemning billions of people around the world to continued poverty by trying to make carbon-emitting fuels too expensive to use – we devoted ourselves to making green energy cheaper?
Right now, solar panels are so expensive – about 10 times more than fossil fuels in terms of cost per unit of energy output – that only well-heeled, well-meaning (and, usually, well-subsidized) Westerners can afford to install them.
But think where we’d be if we could improve the efficiency of solar cells by a factor of ten – in other words, if we could make them cheaper than fossil fuels.
We wouldn’t have to force (or subsidize) anyone to stop burning coal and oil.
Everyone, including the Chinese and the Indians, would shift to the cheaper and cleaner alternatives – and global emission targets would automatically be met.
Can we achieve this technological miracle over the next 20 to 40 years?
In a word, yes.
The price of solar energy has been dropping steadily for 30 years – by about 50% every decade – and we could likely accelerate that decline further with sufficiently large investments in research and development.
How large?
If we were willing to devote just 0.2% of global GDP (roughly $100 billion a year) to green-energy R&amp;D, I believe that we could bring about game-changing breakthroughs not just for solar power, but also for a wide variety of other alternative-energy technologies.
This belief in the potential of technological progress strikes some climate activists as naïve or even delusional.
But is it really?
Consider one of the miracles of the modern age – the personal computer.
These devices didn’t become household items because governments subsidized purchases or forced up the price of typewriters and slide rules.
No, what happened is that, largely as a result of the space race, the United States government poured lots of money into R&amp;D for solid-state physics and electronics engineering. The resulting breakthroughs not only got Neil Armstrong to the moon in 1969, but also made it possible for Apple to introduce the first Mac in 1976 and IBM to debut the first PC five years later.
We can do the same for clean energy.
Forget about subsidizing inefficient technologies or making fossil fuels too expensive to use. Instead, let’s fund the basic research that will make green energy too cheap and easy to resist.
Afghanistan Is Lost Without Better Governance
NEW YORK – President Obama's recent trip to Afghanistan highlighted the growing American and international perception that without better governance Afghanistan will fail.
As President Obama apparently made clear in his late night meeting with President Hamid Karzai, no matter what other progress is made, America and its allies cannot succeed in Afghanistan unless the Afghan government succeeds—and that government is moving in the wrong direction.
Until this changes, all other efforts will ultimately be in vain and current levels of international engagement with Afghanistan will become unjustifiable.
The United States and its Afghan and NATO allies have demonstrated unmistakable progress in Afghanistan this year.
The ongoing Marja campaign, the arrest of Mullah Abdul Ghani Baradar and two Taliban "shadow governors" in Pakistan, and the recent drone strike hitting top leaders of the Al Qaeda-affiliated Haqqani network are all clear steps in the right direction.
President Obama has defined America's goals in Afghanistan as denying Al Qaeda a safe haven, reversing the Taliban's momentum, and helping the country's security forces and government "take lead responsibility for Afghanistan’s future."
To this end, Obama launched an 18-month military "surge" with the backing of other NATO member countries, to be followed by the beginning of withdrawal.
To achieve these goals in such a short time, NATO and its Afghan partners must overcome three enormous obstacles.
First, they must fight far more successfully against the Taliban to create space for rebuilding and possible negotiation.
Second, they must convince Pakistan to begin actively opposing the Afghan Taliban and denying them the safe haven and support they currently receive in Pakistan.
Third, they must support the emergence of a legitimate Afghan government that is not, unlike the current government, seen as corrupt and ineffectual by its citizens.
Because the NATO strategy's success requires significant progress on each of these fronts, even the current preliminary signs of military progress and in Pakistan's relations with the Afghan Taliban will be for naught if Afghanistan's government cannot establish its legitimacy domestically.
Recent efforts by President Hamid Karzai’s administration to limit its public accountability demonstrate that the Afghan government in its current form lacks either the capacity or the willingness to do so.
For at least a year prior to the August 2009 elections, NATO officials recognized that ordinary Afghans' disgust with their government's massive corruption was among the Taliban's most effective recruitment tools.
At that time, these officials argued that the elections would give Afghanistan’s leaders a clear mandate for reform.
The deeply discredited elections put an end to those hopes.
The original flaw of the 2009 elections was structural. There was no voter list, and so it was nearly impossible to prevent ballot-stuffing.
The body empowered to conduct the vote, the Independent Election Commission, was run by commissioners all appointed by and partial to one candidate, Karzai.
One institution, the Electoral Complaints Commission—a hybrid Afghan-international oversight body with a majority vote controlled by United Nations-appointed commissioners—retained its credibility throughout the process.
Only the presence of the ECC, particularly its international commissioners, and the hope that it would ensure at least some fairness into the process prevented the electoral controversy from erupting into open conflict.
As flawed as the elections were and as contentious as the outcome ultimately was, the situation would have been far worse without the ECC.
After the election, many hoped that Karzai would recognize the need to build a more accountable government to help secure both Afghanistan's future and the future of international military and financial support.
In a high-profile speech in London this past January, Karzai pledged to make progress in fighting corruption and promoting government accountability.
Instead, the opposite appears to be happening.
Since his London speech, Karzai has actively opposed efforts to attack official corruption, sought to appoint warlords to his cabinet, failed to promote civil society, and weakened processes aimed at increasing the representation of women in parliament.
To make matters worse, Karzai issued a decree on February 13 permitting him to appoint all of the ECC's members, a measure clearly designed to strengthen the patronage system and weaken opposition movements’ prospects in future elections and a strong demonstration that his administration is not serious about establishing greater government accountability.
NATO and the international community must do everything possible to foster accountable government at all levels in Afghanistan.
Although Afghanistan's government does not need to be fully centralized, Afghanistan cannot succeed if the central government fails.
For this reason, unless the Karzai government changes course there is no justification for NATO member countries to risk the lives of their soldiers and commit other valuable resources to the struggle in Afghanistan if the Afghan government’s corruption and legitimacy deficit make current progress unsustainable and achievement of NATO’s goals impossible.
Karzai is free to lead his country as he pleases, but America and its allies cannot and should not maintain their current levels of commitment unless his government can establish itself as a viable partner.
The 18-month clock is ticking.
No Exit from Afghanistan
NEW DELHI – Despite frequent turmoil and repeated invasions, Afghanistan has remained virtually unchanged for centuries.
Nearly 120 years ago, Winston Churchill described the futility of warfare in the region: “Financially it is ruinous.
Morally it is wicked.
Militarily it is an open question, and politically it is a blunder.”
Churchill’s assessment undoubtedly rings true for many United States and NATO officials today, as they attempt to coordinate an exit from America’s longest overseas combat commitment in history.
While the war in Afghanistan may have resulted in fewer American deaths and injuries than previous US wars, the human cost remains substantial – especially after factoring in Afghan deaths and injuries.
Moreover, trillions of dollars have been wasted, with the few positive effects of the US-led military intervention already beginning to fade, and its many adverse consequences continuing to destabilize the region.
US President Barack Obama is now trying to negotiate a new “status of forces” agreement with the Afghan government in order to establish how many US troops will remain in Afghanistan and the terms of their deployment.
But the reality is that the US is scuttling from a conflict that it has lost, just as it did in Vietnam almost 40 years ago, leaving the beleaguered population to its own devices.
Rather than admit defeat, US officials are resorting to diversionary rhetoric.
For example, speaking recently in New Delhi, Secretary of State John Kerry said that the key to stabilizing Afghanistan is to build a “new silk road” connecting it with central Asia – a cynical contrivance apparently aimed at cloaking America’s failure in illusions of future commerce.
Kerry’s insistence that the US is not withdrawing, but “drawing down,” is a similarly transparent attempt at manipulation.
To be sure, America’s presence in Afghanistan has spawned important regional linkages; unfortunately, they are not the kind that support economic renewal.
The last decade of war and lawlessness has facilitated the Taliban’s proliferation across Pakistan and Afghanistan, leading the Taliban to consider itself an indefatigable force – a belief that could lead its leaders to undercut any progress toward stability.
In fact, the Taliban’s confidence already drove them to disrupt plans for peace talks with the Afghan government.
After agreeing to establish an office in Qatar exclusively to host the talks, in June the Taliban opened a quasi-embassy of the “Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan.”
The Afghan government responded by suspending talks with the Taliban, as well as the status-of-forces negotiations with the US.
Pakistan recommends seeking an alternate venue for the negotiations with the Taliban, rather than abandoning reconciliation efforts altogether.
This bodes well for the resumption of talks, given that Pakistan played a leading role in facilitating the Taliban’s emergence and is now home to the Afghan Taliban’s ruling council, including its leader, Mullah Omar, along with the Pakistani Taliban.
India’s former ambassador to Afghanistan, Vivek Katju, is confident that Afghan President Hamid Karzai’s anger at the Taliban’s gambit in Qatar will not delay negotiations for long.
(Indeed, Karzai has reportedly already met with Taliban representatives for secret talks aimed at restarting the stalled peace initiative.)
Katju attributes the talks’ inevitable resumption to America’s “strategic desperation,” which is so acute that the US would be unlikely even to follow through on Kerry’s pledge to call off the talks if any link to Al Qaeda were found.
After all, the US has already accepted the Taliban’s unrealistic assurances that it will not use Afghanistan as a base from which to “foment trouble” – that is, execute terrorist attacks – elsewhere.
Fortunately for the US, the Taliban is no longer a homogeneous group.
A decade of running and hiding from unrelenting surveillance and targeted drone attacks has caused the movement to splinter.
Yet, as the security expert Sajjan M. Gohel has observed, “the displaced and disillusioned Taliban youth of today” have “found solace and purpose in an extremely radical interpretation of Islam.”
The Taliban may no longer be a unified force, but they clearly remain a dangerous one.
All of these developments have put India in a difficult position.
In Afghanistan, America’s military was so tactically dependent on Pakistan that, on several occasions, the US encouraged India to curtail development projects, such as rebuilding Afghanistan’s infrastructure.
Following America’s military withdrawal, Afghanistan will most likely revert to pre-war conditions; Pakistan will revive state-sponsored terrorism against India; and extremism will spill into the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir.
In order to make the best of a grim situation, India must be prepared to protect its own interests at all costs.
After all, as the US extricates itself from its Afghan quagmire, its own national interests will continue to trump all other considerations.
But China, Pakistan, and Iran also have their own important national-security interests in Afghanistan that each will now do their utmost to guarantee.
So, while US troops may be leaving Afghanistan, an end to the violence spawned by America’s war remains nothing more than a distant dream – especially for Afghanistan’s South Asian neighbors.
Afghanistan’s Customary Anguish
FARAH , AFGHANISTAN – When the problems riddling Afghan society are listed – violence, insecurity, corruption, religious fundamentalism – one dominating factor is usually left out: the influence of customary law.
In Afghanistan, there are three principal legal references:   constitutional law, the Koran, and the system of customary law known as Farhang , the most dominant and strictest version of which is called Pashtunwali (the way of the Pashtuns).
Originally an ancient honor code, Farhang ensures the dominance of the oldest male of any household, followed by married sons, unmarried sons, and grandsons, then wives (with the youngest at the bottom).
Collective decisions are taken by patriarchs in councils called jirgas , where all have to be in agreement.
This agreement includes including collaborating or not with the Taliban, cooperating with the Coalition forces, accepting or refusing poppy eradication in a village.
Everything else is left to patriarchal discretion.   Here, no one will intervene except to reinforce the application of   the patriarch's rights – say, in stoning a supposedly wayward girl, or turning a blind eye to so-called “honor killings” of women.
Every act of an Afghan male’s life is integrated in a form of reciprocity, in which nothing is free.
Melmastia , the basic tenet of hospitality means “I will give you shelter if you ask me to, even if you are a fugitive murderer; but, in exchange, you fight my battles.”
This sense of customary obligation is why so many of President Hamid Karzai’s cronies remain in place and Taliban leaders remain safe.
Women are excluded from collective decision-making, as they are mere objects.
Girls are literally sold upon marriage (the father is paid money for his daughter’s labor and reproductive capacity) and join their husband’s household.
The younger the girl, the higher the price.
Marriage, especially in the provinces, is routinely consummated on pre-pubescent bodies.
Yet women are precious in their own way.
A family’s principal “cultural capital” is its honor, which is ensured by denying women any opportunity to highlight male failings and therefore tarnish clan respectability.
As a result, women must be strictly secluded and made invisible when in public, for they are personally responsible for the desire that they could ignite in schools, hospitals, parks, or markets.
The all-covering burqa ensures sufficient anonymity to permit women a certain amount of freedom in public space.
Every female simultaneously carries her father’s and her husband’s honor, and will stoically submit to all forms of violence committed in its name.
This may mean dying in childbirth rather than risking the “dishonor” of giving birth in a public place, a hospital, in front of strangers.
Going to court is practically unheard of, as it would mean renouncing family practices.
From the male point of view, resorting to outside police or judicial intervention would signify an inability to fight one’s own battles – an admission of defeat and a symbolic castration.
This helps explain the intense corruption present in Afghan courts, where “honor” can be redeemed by bribing a judge to have a rapist or murderer released.
As violence is strictly a private matter, relinquishing justice to state institutions could be an unacceptable humiliation.
Customary law is not rigid in that it is made to fit round the demands of global economy.
It has become more rigorous in it s applications due to the influence of
For example, while the Koran allows for a measure of female inheritance, tribal custom does not authorize it, which explains the popularity of tribal councils to resolve inheritance problems and cheat women out of their rights.
Similarly, whereas the Koran requires four eyewitnesses as proof of adultery, mere suspicion of some unregulated, potentially sexual conduct by a woman warrants stoning under customary law.
Yet an awareness of alternatives is seeping in through the media, even in remote provinces.
Iranian films and the much loved Indian TV serials, not to mention the occasional American film, influence peoples' expectations.
Add to that the experience of having lived abroad as refugees in Pakistan and Iran.
Girls know that there are options to an unacceptable way of life: women are increasingly demanding more from life than what custom ordains.
This is especially true for those who have lived in Iran, a totally Muslim environment that allows women the freedom to study and work as well as access to adequate healthcare and family planning.
Once back in rural Afghanistan, forced into brutal marriages, many desperate women – especially returnees from Iran – resort to self-immolation.
Violence and murder of women are on the increase, perpetrated by men who feel that these alternatives pose a threat to their authority.
The West imagines that religion is the central issue in Afghanistan.
But the heart of the matter is the preservation of ancient patriarchal rights that go back to Biblical times, reformatted to fit the demands of globalized capitalism.
Governments and international aid organizations have failed to take into consideration the role of Farhang , perhaps because the power of unwritten law remains largely inconceivable in the West.
But Afghanistan cannot begin to solve its many problems until it criminalizes the privatized violence of this antiquated code.
Afghanistan’s Drug-Friendly Environment
Afghanistan’s President Hamid Karzai has stepped up international fundraising efforts in recent weeks, seeking a fresh package of military and reconstruction aid from the United States, together with stronger strategic guarantees.
But Karzai’s relationship with his sponsors has begun to sour, in part owing to charges that his government has failed to stop the resurgence of Afghanistan’s huge opium trade.
Underlying the opium trade issue is a security threat of another kind, one overlooked since the US-led invasion toppled the Taliban regime in 2001, despite the grave risk it poses to Afghanistan’s long-term stability, and that of the region.
In countries like Afghanistan, where 80% of the population lives on what they grow and many communities live far from any water source, environmental damage can be both economically devastating and politically momentous.
That lesson should have been absorbed and understood, not least by American strategists, long before the Taliban’s fall.
After all, desertification and deforestation helped fuel the rise, two decades earlier, of the Maoist guerilla group Sendero Luminoso (Shining Path) in Peru.
Sendero, which supplemented its income with drug production and timber smuggling, deliberately chose drought-weakened and deforested mountain villages as the stronghold of its insurgency.
Similarly, the Maoist insurgency in Nepal, which has claimed 10,000 lives, exploits the desperation of mountain villagers hit by flash floods – the result of deforestation higher up.
No Maoist group could ever gain a toehold in Afghanistan’s parched Pashtun south (these were, after all, people who, bare-knuckled, smashed the Soviets).
But the Taliban’s rapid rise in the 1990’s was inextricably linked to the failure of irrigation systems.
Villagers whose crops shriveled and whose livestock died in a prolonged drought saw joining the Taliban as an economic opportunity.
Had there been more irrigation, the Taliban’s gains might have been far less impressive.
The Taliban are now an increasingly spent force, but lack of water reinforced the logic of opium production across its former strongholds in the south.
Irrigation has failed or is inadequate in Helmand, Uruzgan, and Kandahar – three of the top five opium-producing provinces – where indebted farmers are hooked by the economics: opium brings in eight times as much cash as wheat and uses less water.
Without serious investment in irrigation, including construction of reservoirs to make use of the snowfall in the Hindu Kush, and in new cash crops such as saffron and rose oil, Afghanistan’s drift toward narco-statehood will continue, with all the instability that this implies.
Clear-cutting of old growth forests in the mountains bordering Pakistan may prove as problematic.
Agriculture there has been damaged by the cutting of walnut, apricot, and mulberry trees for winter fuel, and by a failure to replant poplar, willow, and tamarisk – the trees that hold fragile meadows in place.
These sorts of trees can be restored, given a concerted campaign and investment in nurseries to produce local varieties.
Loss of the ancient cedar, pine, fir, and oak forests on the slopes above is another matter.
This year’s snowmelt caused landslides and flooding – a warning of more soil erosion and destruction of arable land to come; hundreds died and thousands lost their livelihoods.
Forestry has always been a problem in Afghanistan.
In 1960, the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization spoke of wasteful logging practices, such as “head-skidding” (in which a log is rolled downhill, ripping up plants and soil).
Aerial photographers were called in, and a large budget was set aside.
But, in 1976, the FAO admitted in a new plan that forest and watershed management activities had “turned out to be quite limited.”
The 1976 plan called for sustainable logging and basic forest-fire control, but war intervened, costing Afghanistan half its forest cover.
Up to 60% of the old growth forest in Nangahar, the second largest opium-producing province, may have been cut during the war years.
Mujahedin factions and later the Taliban exported stands of fine-grained cedar by the truckload from Nangahar and surrounding provinces to Pakistan, often in return for arms.
Illegal logging continues today, with only ineffectual efforts made to stop it.
At the current rate, Afghanistan’s old growth forest could vanish within a decade.
The UN acknowledges the problem but is (rightly) unwilling to risk sending forestry experts into a tribal region where American and allied troops venture only in armored convoys.
Safety concerns and cost also limit intervention by international conservation organizations.
A new initiative called the Green Corps includes 300 forest rangers charged with stopping illegal logging, and the ministry hopes to boost their numbers within a year. But the initiative is unlikely to have much effect.
Illegal logging crews number 200 or more.
They have chain saws and trucks. They are armed and work with the backing of drug and emerald smugglers – and often of local officials.
The price of plank cedar in Lahore is incentive enough to corrupt, or kill, any Green Corps men brave enough to stand in their way.
Environmental issues are of paramount importance in marginal countries because their impact on human survival is immediate and direct.
The inadequate response to pressing questions of natural resource management, whether of water or trees, merely strengthens the hands of opium dealers and malcontents in what is already the most disaffected and sensitive part of Afghanistan – the clear-cut mountain slopes where intelligence officers believe Osama bin Laden is most likely holed up.
Afghanistan’s Feminist Revolution
On April 16, more than 300 Afghani women – many of them students – marched together in Kabul in protest of a new law passed by Parliament that would impose a series of Taliban-like restrictions on women.
The law would permit marital rape, limit women’s movements – say, for work or study – without male permission, and even make it illegal for a woman to refuse to dress as her husband wishes.
The women, facing a crowd of furious men calling them “whores” and other epithets, marched two miles under a rain of abuse and delivered their petition against the law to legislators.
Both houses of Parliament had approved the law, and President Hamid Karzai signed it.
The law now affects only the Shia minority, but threatens to affect pending legislation that could restrict the rights of non-Shia women as well.
When Western media sought quotes from the women, they frequently heard a Western-style feminist refrain: “These laws would make women into a kind of property.”
In the West, the counterpoint to the notion of woman as property has been a highly individualistic demand for personal autonomy – decision-making based primarily on a woman’s own wishes, rather than as wife, mother, community member, or worshipper.
But, while some Western feminist insights may be useful to Afghani women and other women in the developing world as they resist certain forms of male oppression, we should not assume – as Western feminists often have – that our job is to proselytize “our” feminism.
On the contrary, the feminism expressed by women such as these Afghani heroines should educate us in the West about our own shortcomings.
The core theory with which emerging feminists in more traditional and religious societies are working is far different from that of Western feminism – and in some ways far more profound and humane.
In India, for example, feminists articulated to me a vision of women’s equality that was family-centered rather than self-centered, and that valued service to community rather than personal gratification.
They did not see their struggle as a cultural or ideological clash between men and women, but rather as a very practical effort to live free from violence and sexual assault, forced child marriage and bride-burning, and legal exclusion from parity.
The emerging consensus in India in support of greater rights and freedoms for women, while certainly causing some upheaval and adjustment (especially within the growing middle classes) has not yet – and might never – poison the basic trust and warmth between men and women.
Nor does it seem likely to emulate the splintered, individualized, solitary society – and the commodified sexual revolution – that Western, self-based feminism reflects.
This version of feminism – the notion that women can claim equality and still have a valued role in the home, prize family above all, and view rights in the context of community and spirituality – seems like a much-needed corrective to some of Western feminism’s shortcomings.
Ideally, men’s drive for progress in the developing world would also evolve, uniting the idea of the autonomous self with support for family, community, and other ties, and Western men would learn from this as well.
Moreover, intellectually, these women remind us that Western feminism did not have to evolve the way it did, and can still change and grow to embrace a more satisfying and humane definition of equality.
Simone de Beauvoir, whose seminal book
The good news for all women, East and West, is that President Karzai, under intense international criticism – and not just Western criticism – changed the law less than one week after the march.
This global uproar is a testament to how three decades of Western feminist challenges to leadership have changed the world for the better.
But our (Western) moment of feminist leadership is over now – for good reasons.
We know by now what our problems are as women in the West, and we know the blueprint for solving them.
What we lack now is not analysis, but the organizational and political will to do so.
So the leadership role is shifting to women in the developing world.
Their agenda is more pressing, and their problems, frankly, far more serious than ours, which makes it much more urgent for them to develop theories appropriate to the challenges they face.
If one of those courageous Afghan women who marched in Kabul wrote – as I hope she or one of her sisters in the developing world is doing right now – the seminal text for the next 50 years on non-Western feminism, it would no doubt be equality-driven and practical.
And perhaps, in its likely view of the world as being more than the sum of consuming, competing autonomies, or gender warfare, it would be a valuable challenge to truisms that we Western feminists – and the men who love us – have thought we had to take for granted.
Afghanistan’s Opium War
When NATO leaders meet for their summit in Riga at the end of this month, there will be a ghost at the feast: Afghanistan’s opium.
Afghanistan is in danger of falling back into the hands of terrorists, insurgents, and criminals, and the multi-billion-dollar opium trade is at the heart of the country’s malaise.
Indeed, NATO’s top general, James Jones, has called drugs the “Achilles heel” of Afghanistan.
This year’s record harvest of 6,100 tons of opium will generate more than $3 billion in illicit revenue – equivalent to almost half of Afghanistan’s GDP.
Profits for drug traffickers downstream will be almost 20 times that amount.
Opium money is corrupting Afghan society from top to bottom.
High-level collusion enables thousands of tons of chemical precursors, needed to produce heroin, to be trucked into the country.
Armed convoys transport raw opium around the country unhindered.
Sometimes even army and police vehicles are involved.
Guns and bribes ensure that the trucks are waved through checkpoints.
Opiates flow freely across borders into Iran, Pakistan, and other Central Asian countries.
The opium fields of wealthy landowners are untouched, because local officials are paid off.
Major traffickers never come to trial because judges are bribed or intimidated.
Senior government officials take their cut of opium revenues or bribes in return for keeping quiet.
Perversely, some provincial governors and government officials are themselves major players in the drug trade.
As a result, the Afghan state is at risk of takeover by a malign coalition of extremists, criminals, and opportunists.
Opium is choking Afghan society.
Within Afghanistan, drug addiction is rising.
Neighbors that used to be transit states for drugs are now major consumers, owing to similar dramatic increases in opium and heroin addiction.
Intravenous drug use is spreading HIV/AIDS in Iran, Central Asia, and the former Soviet Union.
In traditional Western European markets, health officials should brace for a rise in the number of deaths from drug overdoses, as this year’s bumper opium crop will lead to higher-purity doses of heroin.
What can be done?
First, the veil of corruption in Afghanistan must be lifted.
Afghans are fed up with arrogant and well-armed tycoons who live in mansions and drive top-of-the range Mercedes limousines – this in a country where barely 13% of the population have electricity and most people must survive on less than $200 a year.
It is time for the Afghan government to name, shame, and sack corrupt officials, arrest major drug traffickers and opium landlords, and seize their assets.
Donors have trained police and prosecutors and built courts and detention centers.
Now it is up to the government to use the judicial system to impose the rule of law.
It will be difficult, but not impossible, to re-establish confidence in the central government.
Putting major drug traffickers behind bars at the new maximum-security prison at Pul-i-Charki, near Kabul, would be a good start.
Of course, Afghanistan does not bear sole responsibility for its plight.
The heroin trade would not be booming if Western governments were serious about combating drug consumption.
It is a bitter irony that the countries whose soldiers’ lives are on the line in Afghanistan are also the biggest markets for Afghan heroin.
Furthermore, Afghanistan’s neighbors must do more to stop insurgents, weapons, money, and chemical precursors from flowing across their borders into the country.
Coalition forces should take a more robust approach to the drug problem.
Counter-insurgency and counter-narcotics are two sides of the same coin.
Improving security and the rule of law must include destroying the opium trade.
Allowing opium traffickers to operate with impunity gives them a free hand to raise money to pay for the arms and fighters battling the Afghan army and NATO forces.
The United Nations Security Council has authorized the International Security Assistance Force to take all necessary measures to fulfill its mandate.
NATO troops should be given the green light to help the Afghan army fight opium – destroy the heroin labs, disband the opium bazaars, attack the opium convoys, and bring the big traders to justice.
And they should be given the tools and manpower to do the job.
There is no point in trying to win the hearts and minds of major drug traffickers.
Farmers are a different story.
Forced eradication risks pushing farmers into the hands of extremists, and thus will not lead to the sustainable reduction of opium fields.
Indeed, as we have seen in some Andean countries, it can be counter-productive.
Therefore, security and development must go hand in hand.
To achieve this, Afghanistan needs more development assistance.
International support so far has been generous, but it is still well below per capita equivalents for other post-conflict situations – and the need is much greater.
Farmers will be weaned off opium over the long term only if they have sustainable livelihoods.
At the moment, Afghanistan’s drug lords are prospering, and rural communities are suffering.
That situation needs to be reversed.
We must punish the traffickers and reward the farmers.
We cannot afford to fail in Afghanistan.
Recent history has given us graphic evidence of what would happen if we do.
But any solution in Afghanistan depends on eliminating its opium.
Afghanistan’s Terrorized Women
KABUL – Recently, the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission (AIHRC) office in Kudoz province reported the rescue of a young woman who had been imprisoned in her in-laws’ dungeon for seven months.
Fifteen-year-old Sahar Gul was forced to marry an older man who serves in the Afghan army. She was then kept in the dungeon by her husband’s family and brutally tortured for months, because she refused to work as a prostitute.
Over the past ten years, the AIHRC has received more than 19,000 complaints related to violence against women.
Despite making some progress in investigating the complaints and referring them to the justice system, as well as in raising public awareness about the issue, the challenges remain huge.
Since 2002, many efforts have been made to improve women’s lives in Afghanistan.
The country has enacted several new laws and established a fairly advanced legal framework to end discrimination against women, including a new law that criminalizes any act that results in violence against women.
But laws and policies alone are not sufficient to protect women from horrific domestic abuse.
Indeed, the Gul case is hardly the only well-publicized case.
There was also Gulnaz, a young woman who was jailed for adultery after being raped by a relative (she was recently released after a presidential pardon, but may be forced to marry her attacker).
The Taliban, for example, have consistently used an anti-women policy to appeal to tribal and rural people.
Third, family pride and honor are deemed more important than a woman’s individual well-being and safety.
For example, if family members beat or abuse a woman, she has few options.
Often, her only choice is to remain silent or risk disgracing the family.
If she does report the matter to the authorities, the case will almost certainly never be properly investigated, nor the perpetrators ever prosecuted.
Gul, for example, complained to the police about her abusive in-laws, but she was returned to the family when some of their influential contacts intervened.
Fourth, laws are often arbitrarily applied, and sharia (Islamic law) frequently takes precedence over civil legislation, resulting in widespread impunity for crimes of violence against women.
For example, in October 2010, the Afghan Supreme Court ruled that women who run away from home can be charged with prostitution, unless they go to the police or an immediate relative's home.&#160;It is this mindset that led to Gul’s victimization.
Finally, while the Taliban lost power ten years ago, discrimination and violence against women has occurred in Afghan society for centuries.
Thus, despite some progress, public and official sensitivity to violence against women is only slowly emerging.
The Afghan government must take several steps to protect women fully.
Above all, perpetrators of violence against women should be prosecuted and tried under due process of law.
This will require strengthening the rule of law and ending the prevailing culture of impunity.
That, in turn, requires educating the public further about human rights and women’s rights through school textbooks, continuing education courses, and a vigorous media campaign.
It also requires persuading representatives and policymakers to develop policies and allocate budget revenues to combat violence against women, and training police and judges to handle cases of violence against women without deferring to claims of family honor.
Perhaps most importantly, non-constitutional justice systems, such as sharia, must be monitored and checked, if not prohibited altogether.
As for Sahar Gul, her case must be thoroughly investigated, and the police and judiciary must commit to bringing her torturers to justice.
Furthermore, Gul’s case, and others like it, should be studied in order to understand the roots of such crimes.
Until Afghanistan’s leaders begin to address this problem seriously, our country will continue to bear the scar of violence against women on its face.
A Flat World and a Round Ball
With the final stage of the World Cup approaching, now is a good opportunity for a mid-tournament appraisal.
This year’s Cup, unlike the previous one in Japan and South Korea in 2002, didn’t witness any real upsets in the first round.
Switzerland and Australia surprisingly reached the elimination round, and the Asian and African teams disappointed somewhat, with only Ghana advancing.
There have been just two ugly matches so far, full of fouls, nasty attacks, and unnecessary aggression, as well as numerous yellow and red cards: Italy vs. the US, and Portugal vs. the Netherlands.
Otherwise, we’re experiencing a wonderful Cup in Germany, in terms of both sportsmanship and the overall atmosphere.
As for Germany and the Germans, one hardly recognizes one’s own country and people.
Even Mother Nature has played along.
After a long winter and a non-existent spring, summer started promptly with the first kick-off – and virtually overnight, Germany has flaunted its sunniest and most delightful side.
The weather is Mediterranean, and all of a sudden, so are the people.
The Cup’s organization has been exceptional (as was to be expected), with excellent police work giving hooligans hardly a chance.
The whole of Germany has been celebrating a never-ending party with guests from all over the world (which was not expected).
And the German team has put on a wonderful display of heart warming and modern offensive soccer (which nobody could have expected!).
More importantly, not only in the German team, but also in the country as a whole, a young, cool, laid-back, and carefree Germany is raising its head – a Germany that is cosmopolitan, friendly, and good-humored.
Years of bad news appear to have passed the Germans by without a trace.
Doctors are on strike, taxes are on the rise, the parties in government are mauling each other, and Chancellor Angela Merkel herself proclaimed in a prominent speech that the country is in disastrous shape.
But the Germans, undaunted by it all, simply keep celebrating one great soccer party with their newfound friends from all over the world.
The black, red, and gold German tricolor adorns the entire country as never before, but almost nowhere are there nationalist undertones.
In fact, the flags of many nations fly alongside German.
In Berlin, as in other large German cities, taxis sport the flags of their drivers’ home countries – from Angola to Saudi Arabia.
Fans don not just their nations’ flags, but also fantastic costumes evocative of their home countries’ colors.
Flags are flown in hope of victory, but also serve to dry the tears of defeat.
In short, Germany during the World Cup is reminiscent of a Shakespearean midsummer night’s dream, with a touch of Woodstock to boot.
Outside the stadiums, public screenings of the games have become joyous mass “happenings.”
And how is the soccer?
This World Cup demonstrates three main developments that the sport has undergone.
First, Europe and South America are more dominant than four years ago and remain the unchallenged great powers of international soccer.
So we must hope that the World Cup in South Africa in 2010 will finally bring greater global parity.
Second, international soccer is witnessing the advent of a new generation.
Spain, Argentina, and Germany, to name but a few countries, have put forward very young teams that have played an impressive game.
On the French, English, and Portuguese teams, too, it is the young players that have shone – despite the continuing presence of Zidane, Beckham, and Figo.
Even the Brazilian squad is looking more aggressive and likely to score with young players like Robinho and Juninho than with their aging champions from 2002.
This generational change is accelerated by a third development.
At the top international level, soccer has become faster and more athletic, and the top teams can shrink space on the field more effectively.
A team that is unable to keep going at full speed for the full 90 (or more) minutes, switch from defense to offense quickly with the whole team, and maintain control of the ball to restrict their opponents' movements won’t stand much of a chance.
Here, soccer parallels today’s globalized markets, which make similar restructuring of national economies necessary.
Unlike economic globalization, however, it remains to be seen whether this new, fast-paced style of soccer will prevail (after all, the young blood of Spain lost to the Old Boys of France).
The sport and its fans will certainly profit if it does.
For now, we have a World Cup filled with soccer that is being shaped by a new, young generation both on and off the playing field – light-hearted, enthralling, and beautiful to watch.
Let’s hope that when the last whistle blows at the final in Berlin on July 9, we Germans retain as much of this positive spirit as possible.
Germany urgently needs this kind of optimism, because, unfortunately, two universal principles will continue to apply in the future: first, the winter will return, and, second, the ball is round and the next game is always the most difficult.
A Free Lunch for America
BERKELEY – Former US Treasury Secretary Lawrence Summers had a good line at the International Monetary Fund meetings this year: governments, he said, are trying to treat a broken ankle when the patient is facing organ failure.
Summers was criticizing Europe’s focus on the second-order issue of Greece while far graver imbalances – between the EU’s north and south, and between reckless banks’ creditors and governments that failed to regulate properly – worsen with each passing day.
But, on the other side of the Atlantic, Americans have no reason to feel smug.
Summers could have used the same metaphor to criticize the United States, where the continued focus on the long-run funding dilemmas of social insurance is sucking all of the oxygen out of efforts to deal with America’s macroeconomic and unemployment crisis.
The US government can currently borrow for 30 years at a real (inflation-adjusted) interest rate of 1% per year.
Suppose that the US government were to borrow an extra $500 billion over the next two years and spend it on infrastructure – even unproductively, on projects for which the social rate of return is a measly 25% per year.
Suppose that – as seems to be the case – the simple Keynesian government-expenditure multiplier on this spending is only two.
In that case, the $500 billion of extra federal infrastructure spending over the next two years would produce $1 trillion of extra output of goods and services, generate approximately seven million person-years of extra employment, and push down the unemployment rate by two percentage points in each of those years.
And, with tighter labor-force attachment on the part of those who have jobs, the unemployment rate thereafter would likely be about 0.1 percentage points lower in the indefinite future.
The impressive gains don’t stop there.
Better infrastructure would mean an extra $20 billion a year of income and social welfare.
A lower unemployment rate into the future would mean another $20 billion a year in higher production.
And half of the extra $1 trillion of goods and services would show up as consumption goods and services for American households.
In sum, on the benefits side of the equation: more jobs now, $500 billion of additional consumption of goods and services over the next two years, and then a $40 billion a year flow of higher incomes and production each year thereafter.
So, what are the likely costs of an extra $500 billion in infrastructure spending over the next two years?
For starters, the $500 billion of extra government spending would likely be offset by $300 billion of increased tax collections from higher economic activity.
So the net result would be a $200 billion increase in the national debt.
American taxpayers would then have to pay $2 billion a year in real interest on that extra national debt over the next 30 years, and then pay off or roll over the entire $200 billion.
The $40 billion a year of higher economic activity would, however, generate roughly $10 billion a year in additional tax revenue.
Using some of it to pay the real interest on the debt and saving the rest would mean that when the bill comes due, the tax-financed reserves generated by the healthier economy would be more than enough to pay off the additional national debt.
In other words, taxpayers win, because the benefits from the healthier economy would more than compensate for the costs of servicing the higher national debt, enabling the government to provide more services without raising tax rates.
Households win, too, because they get to buy more and nicer things with their incomes.
Companies win, because goods and workers get to use the improved infrastructure.
The unemployed win, because some of them get jobs. And even bond investors win, because they get their money back, with the interest for which they contracted.
So what is not to like?
Nothing.
How, you might ask, can I say this?
I am an economist – a professor of the Dismal Science, in which there are no free lunches, in which benefits are always balanced by costs, and in which stories that sound too good to be true almost inevitably are.
But there are two things different about today.
First, the US labor market is failing so badly that expanded government spending carries no resource cost to society as a whole.
Second, bond investors are being really stupid.
In a world in which the S&amp;P 500 has a 7% annual earnings yield, nobody should be happy holding a US government 30-year inflation-adjusted bond that yields 1% per year.
That six-percentage-point difference in anticipated real yield is a measure of bond investors’ extraordinary and irrational panic.
They are willing to pay 6% per year for “safety.”
Right now, however, the US government can manufacture “safety” out of thin air merely by printing bonds.
The government, too, would then win by pocketing that 6% per year of value – though 30 years from now, bondholders who feel like winners now would most likely look at their portfolios’ extraordinarily poor performance of over 2011-2041 and rue their strategy.
A French Presidential Primer
The late British Prime Minister Harold Wilson used to quip that “a week is a long time in politics.”
So, in the 30 or so weeks between now and the next French presidential election, any prediction made today could be reversed, and reversed again, before the vote.
But two candidates have emerged as clear and constant favorites in opinion polls: Nicolas Sarkozy on the right and Ségolène Royal on the left.
In fact, they have more in common than meets the eye, for each speaks of a rupture with the past while incarnating a form of continuity.
For Sarkozy, “rupture” reflects both mundanely tactical and deeply personal choices.
The 12 years of Jacques Chirac‘s presidency, together with France’s tradition of alternation in power, suggests a victory for the left.
Positioning himself as the candidate who represents a sharp break with today’s unpopular politics is the only means to escape that fate.
This is reflected in Sarkozy’s openly pro-American stance – an act of political courage in a France where anti-Americanism is running high.
Sarkozy’s message is that Chirac and Villepin were right in substance to oppose America’s military adventure in Iraq, but that their style was disastrously wrong.
Thus, his deep admiration for “American values,” while sincere, implies no embrace of President George W. Bush.
It also reassures the French business community, which was shocked by Dominique de Villepin’s flamboyant opposition to the United States when he was Chirac’s foreign minister.
At home, Sarkozy has aimed his message particularly at the young, issuing a patriotic call to the values of work and discipline, a counter-revolutionary revolution.
The revolution that must be overcome is that of May 1968, whose leaders and supporters, according to Sarkozy, may have lost politically to de Gaulle, but deeply weakened France over the succeeding decades with their emphasis on “false values.”
By contrast, rebelling against one’s parents’ generation and rediscovering traditional moral stances will save France – a message that is highly applicable to issues, such as education and immigration, that may dominate the electoral campaign.
In the case of Royal, the meaning of “rupture” is both more obvious and more visible.
She is seeking to become the first woman President of the French Republic.
To achieve her goal, she prefers to emphasize her “essence,” thereby countering Sarkozy’s stress on his record as a “doer.”
Her appeal to voters is simple: “I am a woman, and you have never tried a woman, so be modern and try one now.”
Hiding behind the originality (in French presidential politics) of her gender, Royal has avoided specifying a detailed program.
When challenged by inquisitive journalists demanding greater precision about her policy agenda, her highly effective line of defense (so far!) has been: “You would not dare to ask me such a question if I were not a woman!”
Thus, Royal’s program is her popularity.
In foreign policy, one can only guess what her priorities would be.
As far as Europe is concerned, she seems as “agnostic” as Sarkozy, who, like her, incarnates a new generation of “post-European” leaders.
In terms of values, Royal, too, seems to represent a rupture with May 1968, with her emphasis on discipline and family.
According to public opinion polls, Royal is the clear favorite of the left and the only candidate able to defeat Sarkozy.
Her support is particularly strong among women voters.
For the Socialist Party, which is eager to return to power but has not yet recovered from the humiliating defeat of Lionel Jospin in the first round of the presidential election in 2002, the question is whether it can afford to resist the wave of favorable public opinion behind Royal.
In the opinion of Royal’s many opponents among Socialist leaders and militants, the dominance of the media in the political process is leading to mediocrity: the qualities required to be elected are becoming nearly incompatible with those needed to govern.
According to Royal’s Socialist critics, the “Hollywoodization” of politics from which she benefits entails a new approach in which leaders follow and followers lead.
But the same criticism can be directed at Sarkozy.
Moreover, both candidates embody continuity – with Chirac’s Gaullist side for Sarkozy and with François Mitterrand for Royal – as much as rupture.
Royal openly claims Mitterand’s legacy as she searches for legitimacy, while Sarkozy’s rejection of Chirac’s legacy has more to do with form than substance.
To a large extent, Sarkozy can be seen as Chirac with more, whereas Royal is clearly Mitterrand with less.
When the voters decide in the spring of 2007, their choice may depend more on negative than positive considerations, as it did in 2002, when Chirac faced the odious nationalist Jean-Marie Le Pen in the second round.
As in 2002, the winner next year will be whomever the electorate dislikes or fears less.
But one way or the other, personalities will prevail over programs.
A Fresh Start for China and Japan?
Edmonton – Chinese President Hu Jintao will make a high-profile visit to Japan from May 6-10, making him the second Chinese head of state ever to travel there.
The trip is being carefully managed by both countries, and is being watched closely around the world, with good reason: Sino-Japanese relations over the past decade have been turbulent, to say the least.
When Hu’s predecessor, Jiang Zemin, traveled to Japan ten years ago, bilateral relations were deteriorating: China was unhappy with the Japanese government’s refusal to extend the same apology offered to South Korea for past aggression; Japan was worried about a rising China and thus turning more confrontational.
The Japanese media’s coverage of the visit was overwhelmingly negative, and it was remembered as a public-relations disaster.
Hu succeeded Jiang in 2002, almost as former Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi was coming to power in Japan, and encouraged “New Thinking” in China’s Japan policy, which would entail moving away from historical grievances and promoting better ties.
But, instead of accepting China’s olive branch, Koizumi implemented a more nationalistic agenda, including annual visits to the Yasukuni Shine, which is regarded as a symbol of Japanese militarism by Japan’s neighbors.
His hard-line approach isolated Japan and angered China, leading to an outburst of anti-Japanese demonstrations in China in 2005.
But both Japan and China recognize that further tension will serve neither country’s long-term interests.
Koizumi’s successors, Prime Ministers Shinzo Abe and Yasuo Fukuda, have sought to engage China over the past two years, with summits in Beijing and a successful visit by Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao to Japan last year.
Hu’s trip is likely follow the example set by Wen.
He will emphasize common strategic interests, highlight mutual economic benefits, generate positive public opinion, and promote further exchanges.
Japan is not only one of China’s largest trade and investment partners, it is also the most powerful neighbor with which China wants to be on good terms, partly to showcase that China’s rise is not a threat to Asia and the rest of the world.
Japan, whose economic recovery is attributable largely to its deepening ties with China in recent years, is also eager to demonstrate that it regards China not as a threat but as an opportunity, as least in economic terms.
It was 30 years ago that former Prime Minister Takeo Fukuda, the father of today’s prime minister, signed a Peace and Friendship Treaty with China.
The two governments will certainly use Hu’s visit to celebrate the anniversary with new programs designed to enhance bilateral understanding and friendship.
But, unlike three decades ago, when the Japanese regarded China as one of their most favored countries, public opinion in both countries nowadays registers more negative feelings than positive ones.
Behind the smiles, the polite interactions, and the cautiously worded diplomatic language, strong undercurrents of suspicion remain.
One problem is the disputed waters of the East China Sea.
Despite new joint projects in energy efficiency and environmental protection, areas in which China ranks Japan as the best performer among industrialized countries, the two sides remain in bitterly divided over these territorial waters, which contain huge potential oil, gas, and other mineral deposits. Even after many rounds of talks, no resolution is in sight, and Hu’s visit is not expected to produce any breakthroughs.
Then there are strategic suspicions.
Fukuda has dropped Abe’s talk about an “arch of freedom” – an effort to forge a bloc with the United States, Australia, and India.
But Japan remains concerned about China’s rapidly modernizing military, while China worries about a potential US-Japan containment strategy for China, especially in the case of a crisis in the Taiwan Straits.
So, although both sides endorse the idea of a “mutually beneficial strategic relationship,” and despite progress bilateral on military exchanges, mutual trust and confidence-building have a long way to go.
Moreover, today’s “warm politics, cool economics” trend is the reverse of the “cold politics, warm economics” pattern under Koizumi.
Last year, Japan’s committed investment projects in China fell 24% from 2006, while actual investment volume decreased by 25%, partly owing to regulatory changes in China regarding foreign investment.
Recent food safety issues, such as the “poisoned dumplings” cases, have clearly heightened the Japanese public’s sensitivity about Chinese exports.
Finally, historical issues could still resurface to cause new problems.
While Fukuda has made it clear that he will not visit the Yasukuni Shrine, 160 other parliamentarians paid homage at the site last month, an indication that conservative forces in Japan remain strong and that future prime ministers may not abstain from visiting Yasukuni.
And Japan has so far failed to live up to its treaty obligations to clean up between 700,000 and two million chemical weapons that were abandoned in China by the Japanese army at the end of World War II, another potential flash point if any of these weapons causes casualties in China.
A Fresh Start for Europe
As Europe’s leaders gather in Portugal to put the finishing touches on the new, slimmed down, Reform Treaty, it might be helpful if they all pretended that the last 50 years of European integration had never taken place.
Let’s then imagine what Europe needs to do to confront its most pressing challenges, especially if it were able to do so without the political constraints of 50 years of EU deal-making and ramshackle institution-building.
On top of that, let us make a major leap of imagination and suppose that even though this scenario of the EU at “Year Zero” means we would not have a half-century of intra-European cooperation to draw on, the nations that today make up the EU would nevertheless be keen to adopt far-reaching joint policies.
Let’s suspend our disbelief, then, and try to imagine what Europe could and should be doing to tackle some of the most far-reaching and obstinate policy challenges that will determine whether the next 50 years are as constructive as the last.
On conflict and security issues, Europe should be advancing to a new phase in which it takes much clearer and unambiguous positions on issues ranging from nuclear proliferation to sanctions against Burma’s military regime.
The purpose must be to establish Europe as a forceful and fair-minded player on the world stage, rather than as a “broad church” in which different viewpoints co-exist.
The aim should be that “soft power” instruments like EU development aid and economic partnerships would be linked with a growing sense of political and security outreach to ensure Europe is a global player to be reckoned with.
That means, of course, that the EU should seek to widen its transatlantic thinking so that the EU and the United States cooperate more closely on defining – and thus protecting – their common interests in a world where together they account for little more than 10% of the total population.
These points are far from a blanket criticism of the EU’s efforts to create a common foreign and security policy.
But they are intended to underline what many people in Europe know very well, which is that the speed with which problems concerning international development and conflict are growing easily outpaces the EU’s policy responses so far.
Building more human capital in Europe and worldwide is a crucially important element in future EU activities.
Education is by far the most profitable investment Europe can make, so it should be launching its most ambitious strategy ever to create a new knowledge dynamic and employment inside the EU while helping to expand greatly education in the world’s poorest countries.
Europe also must at last grasp the nettle of immigration policy – something that has persistently eluded generations of political leaders.
Agreed EU-wide immigration rules are needed to reconcile shrinking Europe’s hunger for imported labor with widespread fears of cultural tensions and social unrest.
It won’t be easy to create a fairer and more multi-cultural Europe, but failure to address this problem openly will carry an even heavier price.
By much the same token, Europe’s governments should be making a determined new effort to strengthen Europeans’ sense of a shared history and common values.
A stronger European identity is the soundest basis for creating the more multi-cultural society that demographers regard as inevitable.
Meanwhile, doubts still surround the political and institutional machinery the EU will need to realize these and other ambitious goals.
Sighs of relief greeted EU leaders’ mid-year agreement on a Reform Treaty aimed at overhauling the Union’s decision-making mechanisms, but it is still uncertain whether the new pact will survive the ratification process in 27 countries.
We believe, though, that the increased use of qualified majority voting by member governments embodied in the new treaty should also be applied to the ratification process itself.
That way, if a small minority of EU governments prove unable to ratify the treaty, it would not be torpedoed the way that its predecessor, the Constitutional Treaty, was in 2005.
Cara untuk Membantu Daerah yang Dilanda Kekeringan di Afrika
SEATTLE – Bayangkan sebuah lahan pertanian kecil di wilayah yang sangat panas.
Kekeringan melanda daerah sekitar lahan tersebut, prospek panen terlihat suram, dan sistem finansial tidak dapat memberikan pinjaman yang dibutuhkan petani untuk bertahan hidup.
Hal ini menggambarkan keadaan di bagian selatan Afrika saat ini, yang sedang dilanda kekeringan yang sangat parah.
Hal ini juga menggambarkan keadaan di bagian timur Nebraska pada masa kekeringan yang terjadi di awal tahun 1930an – sebuah masa yang dialami oleh keluarga Saya. 
Ayah Saya, Ralph Raikes, adalah orang pertama dikeluarganya yang lulus kuliah.
Setelah bekerja di Standard Oil di Kalifornia, beliau mampir ke lahan pertanian milik orang tuanya sebelum pergi ke Cambridge, Massachusetts, dimana beliau akan mengambil program pasca sarjana di MIT.
Namun beliau tidak jadi mengambil program tersebut.
Hal ini karena beliau harus tinggal di Nebraska untuk membantu kakek Saya menyelamatkan lahan pertaniannya agar tidak disita seluruhnya oleh bank, yang pada saat itu sudah menyita sepertiga lahan kakek Saya.
Hal terpenting yang ayah Saya lakukan adalah mengubah pola pikirnya; beliau melihat lahan pertanian tersebut bukan hanya sekedar cara untuk bertahan hidup, namun sebagai bisnis keluarga.
Beliau pergi ke Universitas Nebraska, tempat dimana Beliau mendapatkan gelar sarjana, dan membeli bibit jagung hibrida dan juga bibit-bibit lain yang telah dimuliakan oleh universitas tersebut.
Lalu Beliau mancatat bibit dan kondisi cuaca, yang pada saat itu masih jarang dilakukan.
Ayah Saya menyadari bahwa Beliau tidak bisa melakukan hal ini sendirian, dan bahwa beliau membutuhkan akses terhadap pinjaman yang lebih baik.
Oleh karena itu, Beliau membantu memandu – pertama sebagai konsumen, dan kemudian sebagai pensehat dan direktur – Credit Farm, sebuah jaringan koperasi bank nasional, dalam upayanya untuk membantu petani-petani di daerah tersebut bertahan hidup selama masa-masa kemarau.
Beliau juga membantu mendirikan Asosiasi Bisnis Pertanian Nebraska, yang mengagregasi data yang beliau dan rekan-rekannya kumpulkan, sehingga mereka bisa menentukan praktek terbaik yang akan dilakukan.
Dan Beliau juga bekerja sama dengan Ibu Saya, Alice, yang menjalankan bisnis ternak unggas milik keluarga.  
Farm Credit dan laboratorium serta rumah kaca Universitas Nebraska didirikan dari dana program pemerintah Amerika yang bertujuan untuk meningkatkan kinerja sektor pertanian.
Sektor ini berada dalam kondisi terpuruk sejak tahun 1933; mengingat bahwa sepertiga penduduk Amerika berprofesi sebagai petani pada saat itu, maka dibutuhkan lebih banyak investasi dalam bidang tersebut.
Pada tahun itu, Kongres menyetujui Undang-Undang Pertanian yang pertama, Undang-undang Penyesuaian Pertanian berhasil meningkatkan investasi ke perekonomian pedesaan dan meningkatkan pendapatan sebesar 50% dalam dua tahun.
Program pertanian Pemerintahan Federal menganggap pertanian sebagai sebuah bisnis, sehingga memungkinkan pebisnis seperti ayah Saya untuk mencapai kesuksesan.  
Delapan puluh tahun kemudian, para petani di Afrika perlu melakukan perubahan yang sama, mereka perlu berpikir bahwa pertanian bukan hanya sekedar cara bertahan hidup, namun merupakan sebuah bisnis keluarga.
Dan, seperti yang ayah Saya lakukan dulu, mereka juga memiliki cara untuk membantu mereka melakukan perubahan: sejumlah bibit baru dan teknologi yang telah dikembangkan dan bisa digunakan oleh pertanian keluarga di Afrika – yaitu petani dengan lahan seluas atau kurang dari 4-5 acre.
Pada bulan Oktober, sekelompok ilmuwan menerima Penghargaan Pangan Dunia karena telah menciptakan dan menyebarkan jenis ubi yang menambahkan vitamin A dalam pola makan orang yang tinggal di Sub-Sahara Afrika, dan jenis bibit lain yang mampu bertahan dalam musim kemarau. 
Namun, seperti yang telah diungkapkan dengan jelas dalam laporan terbaru Aliansi Revolusi Ramah Lingkungan di Afrika (AGRA), investasi pemerintah harus sesuai ilmu pengetahuan yang ada.
Pertanian adalah mata pencaharian dua pertiga tenaga kerja di negara-negara Sub-Sahara Afrika, dan pada tahun 2003, Uni Afrika telah mengibau negara-negara anggotanya untuk meningkatkan investasi mereka di sektor tersebut hingga mencapai 10% dari belanja pemerintah.
Hanya 13 negara yang memenuhi imbauan tersebut, namun investasi mereka – dalam bidang penelitian dan pengembangan, layanan yang membantu petani memanfaatkan temuan penelitian baru, kredit dan pembiayaan, pertukaran komoditas, dan upaya pemasaran lainnya – telah menuai manfaat.
Ketiga belas negara tersebut telah mengalami peningkatan produksi pertanian, per kapita PDB, dan juga peningkatan nutrisi.   
Investasi pemerintah membuka jalan bagi investasi dari swasta, dan hal ini bisa sangat mengubah kondisi para petani Afrika, yang telah terlalu lama melihat pertanian hanya sebagai cara bertahan hidup.
Hanya sekitar 6% dari rumah tangga di pedesaan Sub-Sahara Afrika menerima pinjaman dari institusi finansial.
Terlebih lagi, hampir dua pertiga dari lahan pertanian Afrika tidak mempunyai elemen nutrisi penting, dan para petani tidak mempunyai pengetahuan teknis dan sumber daya untuk mengembalikan kesuburan lahan pertanian mereka, sehingga mereka tidak bisa mendapatkan manfaat penuh dari teknologi termutakhir.
Para petani di Afrika yang menanam varietas tanaman baru hanya dapat meningkatkan panen sebesar 28%, hal ini berbeda dengan petani di Asia yang bisa mencapai hasil 88%. 
Orang tua Saya memastikan bahwa kelima anak mereka lulus kuliah.
Sama dengan para petani lainnya yang ingin memastikan bahwa anak-anak mereka bisa hidup sehat dan sukses; dan mereka menyadari pentingnya pendidikan.
Para petani yang pernah Saya temui di berbagai belahan dunia kebanyakan hanya ingin bisa menjual hasil panen yang cukup untuk membayar biaya kesehatan dan menyekolahkan anak-anak mereka.
Mereka memanfaatkan peluang yang muncul, dan memposisikan anak-anak mereka agar dapat mempunyai masa depan yang lebih baik. 
Saya berharap bahwa cerita kemajuan ekonomi Amerika, seperti yang dialami oleh keluarga Saya, akan menjadi cerita yang dialami juga oleh Afrika.
Dengan banyaknya inovasi yang ada, keluarga petani di Afrika memerlukan pemerintah untuk berinvestasi pada masa depan mereka.
Jika mereka melakukan hal ini, maka masa depan akan menjadi lebih baik dibandingkan dengan kondisi sekarang yang dilanda kemarau dan keputusasaan.              
Africa at Risk
ADDIS ABABA – Climate change will hit Africa – a continent that has contributed virtually nothing to bring it about – first and hardest.
Aside from Antarctica, Africa is the only continent that has not industrialized.
Indeed, since 1980’s the industrialization that had taken place in Africa has by and large been reversed.
Africa has thus contributed nothing to the historical accumulation of greenhouse gases through carbon-based industrialization.
Moreover, its current contribution is also negligible, practically all of it coming from deforestation and degradation of forests and farmland.
Yet climate change will hit Africa hardest, because it will cripple the continent’s vulnerable agricultural sector, on which 70% of the population depends.
All estimates of the possible impact of global warming suggest that a large part of the continent will become drier, and that the continent as a whole will experience greater climatic variability.
We know what the impact of periodic droughts have been on the lives of tens of millions of Africans.
We can therefore imagine what the impact of a drier climate on agriculture is likely to be.
Conditions in this vital economic sector will become even more precarious than they currently are.
Africa will not only be hit hardest, but it will be hit first.
Indeed, the long dreaded impact of climate change is already upon us.
The current drought covering much of East Africa – far more severe than past droughts – has been directly associated with climate change.
The upcoming climate negotiations ought to address the specific problems of Africa and similarly vulnerable poor parts of the world.
This requires, first and most importantly, reducing global warming to the apparently inevitable increase of two degrees Celsius, beyond which lies an environmental catastrophe that could be unmanageable for poor and vulnerable countries.
Second, adequate resources should be made available to poor and vulnerable regions and countries to enable them to adapt to climate change.
Climate change, which was largely brought about by the activities of developed countries, has made it difficult for poor and vulnerable countries to fight poverty.
It has created a more hostile environment for development. No amount of money will undo the damage done.
But adequate investment in mitigating the damage could partly resolve the problem.
Developed countries are thus morally obliged to pay partial compensation to poor and vulnerable countries and regions to cover part of the cost of the investments needed to adapt to climate change.
Various estimates have been made of the scale of investment required by those countries.
One conservative estimate – which has a reasonable chance of being accepted precisely because it is conservative – calls for $50 billion per year as of 2015, increasing to $100 billion by 2020 and beyond.
A transitional financing arrangement would be put in place for the period 2010-2015.
Some argue that developed countries cannot come up with such sums, particularly given their current economic challenges.
But no one has so far argued that the cost of damage caused to the development prospects of poor countries and regions is less than the amount of compensation being offered to cover adjustment costs.
The reason is obvious: the damage caused is many times higher than the compensation being requested.
Nonetheless, it is argued, whatever the real cost of the damage, developed countries currently cannot afford to provide that kind of money.
But we all know that these countries and their national banks were able to spend trillions of dollars in a few months to bail out their bankers, who earned super-profits when the going was good.
When the good times ended, taxpayers and governments were prepared to rescue them and to ensure that they continued to receive their extraordinary bonuses.
If the developed world is able to pay trillions of dollars to clean up its bankers’ mess, how is it possible that it cannot afford to pay billions of dollars to clean up a mess that it created, and that is threatening the survival of whole continents?
Clearly this is not about the availability of resources. It is about the inappropriate priorities in how resources are allocated.
It is about moral values that make it appropriate to rescue bankers, who expect everyone but themselves to pay for the mess they created, and inappropriate to compensate the world’s poorest people, whose survival is threatened precisely because of the mess created by developed countries.
I cannot believe that people in developed counties, when informed about the issues, would support rescuing bankers and oppose partial compensation for poor countries and regions.
I cannot believe that they will let such an injustice occur.
If they are not expressing their outrage over the injustice of it all, it can only be because they are inadequately informed.
Africa, Climate Change, and the G-8 Summit
British Prime Minister Tony Blair has declared that the two issues at the center of the G-8 Summit this July will be African poverty and global climate change.
These may seem to be distinct issues. In fact, they are linked.
A trip I took to a village in the Tigre region in northern Ethiopia shows why.
One morning, I was taken to a dry riverbed at the village’s edge.
Farmers were digging a pit in the riverbed, down to the water table approximately two meters below ground level.
They explained that until recently this was a perennial river – one that flows throughout the year – but now the river stops flowing during the dry season.
Only when the annual rains begin in the summer does water reappear in the river bed.
Until then, water-starved communities dig for water, if they can find it and if they can afford to pump it out.
In northern Ethiopia, as in much of Africa, the rain cycle has changed markedly in recent years.
Ethiopian village life has long depended on two crops, one during a short rain in March and April, and the main crop during the long rain in the summer months.
In recent years, the short rains have failed entirely, and long rains have been erratic.
Hunger is omnipresent.
Perhaps half of the children are severely underweight.
Much of arid sub-Saharan Africa, notably in the Sahel (the region just south of the Sahara desert), has experienced a pronounced drop in rainfall over the past quarter-century.
This decline coincided with a rise in the surface temperature of the neighboring Indian Ocean, a hint that the decline in rainfall is in fact part of the longer-term process of man-made global warming.
Failures of rainfall contribute not only to famines and chronic hunger, but also to the onset of violence when hungry people clash over scarce food and water.
When violence erupts in water-starved regions such as Darfur, Sudan, political leaders tend to view the problems in narrow political terms.
If they act at all, they mobilize peacekeepers, international sanctions, and humanitarian aid.
But Darfur, like Tigre, needs a development strategy to fight hunger and drought even more than it needs peacekeepers. Soldiers cannot keep peace among desperately hungry people.
One course of action must be to help impoverished African regions to “adapt” to climate change and to escape the poverty trap.
Water-stressed regions like Ethiopia and Sudan can adapt, at least in part, through improved technologies such as “drip irrigation,” rainwater harvesting, improved water storage facilities, deep wells, and agro-forestry techniques that make best use of scarce rainfall. Better land-management practices (the re-planting of degraded forests, for example) can recharge underground water aquifers.
Poor countries cannot afford these technologies on their own.
Nor should they have to.
Help for poor countries in Africa and elsewhere to adapt to climate change should not be described as charity or aid, but rather as compensation for damages being imposed on the poorest people on the planet.
Greater help for these countries to escape from extreme poverty has been promised for decades but has not been delivered.
In addition to adapting to climate change, the world must also reduce future risks to the planet by cutting back on emissions of greenhouse gases, which are the source of man-made climate change.
While adaptation to climate change is necessary – because it is already occurring – this is not enough.
If the world fails to mitigate future climate change, the effects of rising temperatures, increasing droughts, more numerous and severe tropical storms, rising sea levels, and a spread of tropical diseases will pose huge threats to the entire planet.
The famines in Ethiopia and the violence in Darfur suggest what can lie ahead.
The best way to reduce long-term climate change is to reduce carbon emissions.
There are at least three options: shift to non-carbon energy sources such as solar or nuclear energy; capture and dispose of the carbon dioxide emitted at carbon-based power plants; economize on energy use, for example by shifting to hybrid automobiles and trucks.
Most likely, all three of these methods will have to play a role.
The effort to reduce greenhouse gases will require decades of action, but, given the long lead times in overhauling the world’s energy systems, we must start now.
Rich countries need to lead the way.
It is ironic that the United States, which portrays itself as a friend of democracy and impoverished countries, gives the smallest share of its GNP in aid among the rich countries, and also refuses to participate in global efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
This is especially ironic because African countries like Ethiopia stand steadfastly and bravely with the US in the fight for freedom and against terrorism, even as they struggle with hunger, disease, and famine.
Moreover, countries like Ethiopia are making valiant, indeed remarkable, efforts to overcome their problems, despite the lack of adequate, and long-promised, help from the world’s richest countries.
Africans suffering from hunger and drought, and indeed poor people everywhere, have a right to ask much more of the US and other rich countries.
Tony Blair is right to call on his rich-country colleagues to follow through on their unfulfilled promises.
Africa’s Path from Poverty
BEIJING – All low-income countries have the potential for dynamic economic growth.
We know this because we have seen it happen repeatedly: a poor, agrarian economy transforms itself into a middle- or even high-income urban economy in one or two generations.
The key is to capture the window of opportunity for industrialization arising from the relocation of light manufacturing from higher-income countries.
That was true in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, and it remains true today.
Japan seized its opportunity in the years following World War II, using labor-intensive industries, such as textiles and simple electronics, to drive its economy until rising labor costs eroded its comparative advantage in those sectors.
That shift then allowed other low-income Asian economies – South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Singapore, and to some extent Malaysia and Thailand – to follow in Japan's footsteps.
China, of course, is the region's most recent traveler along this well-trodden path.
After more than three decades of breakneck economic growth, it has transformed itself from one of the poorest countries on earth to the world's largest economy.
And now that China, too, is beginning to lose its comparative advantage in labor-intensive industries, other developing countries – especially in Africa – are set to take its place.
Indeed, ever since the Industrial Revolution, the rise of light manufacturing has driven a dramatic rise in national income.
The United Kingdom's economic transformation started with textiles.
In Belgium, France, Sweden, Denmark, Italy, and Switzerland, light manufacturing led the way.
Similarly, in the United States, cities like Boston, Baltimore, and Philadelphia became centers for producing textiles, garments, and shoes.
Until recently, few believed that Africa, too, could become a center for modern manufacturing.
But, with the right policies, there is no reason why African countries could not follow a similar trajectory.
Consider land-locked Ethiopia, which only ten years ago seemed to be an especially bad bet.
But then the country built an industrial park near Addis Ababa and invited the Chinese shoemaker Huajian to open a factory there.
Huajian opened its doors in January 2012 with two production lines and some 600 workers.
By the end of the year, it had employed 2,000 Ethiopians and doubled the country's exports of leather shoes.
Today, the company has 3,500 workers in Ethiopia producing more than two million shoes a year.
In 2013, spurred by Huajian's success, the Ethiopian government created a new industrial park, with space for 22 factory units.
Within three months, all of them had been leased by export-oriented companies from Turkey, Korea, Taiwan, China, and elsewhere.
The World Bank has provided $250 million to support the continued construction of these industrial parks.
The Ethiopian success story is just the start.
As investors learn more about Africa, they will increasingly see what it has to offer.
Indeed, the cost of labor in Africa is competitive enough that Ethiopia could attract companies from countries as poor as Bangladesh.
Africa has a surplus of agricultural labor and too few other jobs.
As foreign firms launch operations in the labor-intensive sectors in which Africa has a comparative advantage, they will train the local workforce.
Some workers will become managers.
They will become familiar with the technology and learn how to maintain consistent quality in the production line.
They will establish contacts with international buyers and investors.
And, eventually, some of them will be able to raise capital and start firms of their own – export companies owned and operated by Africans.
Mauritius shows the path ahead.
In the 1970s, the government set up industrial parks to process textiles and garments for export.
At the time, most of the owners were from Taiwan or Hong Kong; today, more than 70% of the island's industrial companies are locally owned.
A carefully focused export strategy is crucial.
The international development community and many African governments want to work toward regional integration, linking the markets of 55 African countries.
This might have its advantages, but it should not be a priority.
Africa today accounts for just 1.9% of global GDP, compared to 21% for the United States and 23% for Europe.
Developing countries must use their limited resources in the most effective way, and there is no question where the most attractive opportunities in Africa are to be found.
For example, instead of investing heavily in the infrastructure needed for regional integration, a country like Ethiopia would be better off building industrial parks and linking them by road to ports in Djibouti.
With the right growth strategy, far-reaching change can come within a person's lifetime – sometimes more than once.
My native Taiwan is now a high-income economy.
But when I was born there, in 1952, the island was poorer than almost every country in Africa.
Then it happened to me again.
I moved to mainland China in 1979, when the country's per capita income was less than one-third of Sub-Saharan Africa's.
Today, China has become an upper-middle-income country, and it is on track to become a high-income country by 2020.
My hope is that I can witness a third economic transformation in my lifetime, this time in Ethiopia and other countries in Africa.
If they stay on the tried and tested path of those who have gone before, there is every chance that I will.
Manfaat dari Pelayanan Kesehatan Digital
BASEL – Afrika telah mengalami banyak perubahan menuju arah yang lebih baik jika dibandingkan dengan waktu Saya pertama kali bekerja sebagai dokter di Angola sekitar 20 tahun yang lalu.
Perubahan yang paling mencolok adalah perubahan dalam bidang penggunaan teknologi seluler di benua ini.
Masyarakat di Afrika – dan juga di semua negara-negara dengan pendapatan rendah dan menengah – menggunakan peluang yang didapat dari teknologi, dengan menggunakan telepon seluler untuk melakukan banyak hal, seperti melakukan pembayaran sampai menerbitkan akta kelahiran, hingga mengakses layanan kesehatan.
Keunggulan dari teknologi seluler terletak pada akses.
Hambatan seperti jarak dan sedikitnya sumber daya telah lama menghambat milyaran orang untuk mendapatkan layanan yang mereka butuhkan. Namun hal ini menjadi lebih mudah dilakukan di jaman digital ini.
Dan, tentunya ada banyak cara dimana teknologi dapat digunakan untuk meningkatkan akses dan pemberian layanan kesehatan.
Ini tentunya bukanlah hal yang baru, dan beberapa tahun belakangan telah banyak bermunculan sejumlah inisiatif kesehatan berbasis teknologi.
Namun hanya ada beberapa yang dikenal dan bisa mencapai kematangan dan mampu bertahan dalam jangka panjang; sejumlah besar proyek kesehatan ini bahkan masih belum melewati tahap uji coba.
Hal ini justru menimbulkan fragmentasi solusi digital untuk permasalahan kesehatan – yang dalam beberapa kasus, dapat mempersulit kondisi sistem layanan kesehatan yang telah ada.  
Langkah pertama untuk mengatasi masalah ini adalah dengan melakukan indetifikasi faktor-faktor yang menghasilkan kesuksesan – dan mana yang menghambat hal tersebut.
Sehubungan dengan hal ini, mungkin faktor yang terpenting adalah bagaimana solusi yang diberikan oleh aplikasi kesehatan itu dihubungkan dengan praktek yang ada di lapangan.
Bagaimanapun, teknologi berfungsi untuk memberikan inovasi terhadap penerapan layanan kesehatan, dan bukan layanan kesehatan itu sendiri.
Solusi yang fokus terhadap pengguna, baik pemberi atau penerima layanan kesehatan, mempunyai peluang untuk sukses.
Yang paling penting dalam hal ini adalah kesadaran bahwa yang pengguna butuhkan bukanlah teknologi yang paling canggih, melainkan solusi yang mudah digunakan dan diterapkan.
Dalam kenyataannya, teknologi yang terbilang lama seperti pesan suara maupun sms dapat menjadi alat yang lebih berguna dibandingkan dengan aplikasi atau teknologi paling canggih, seperti nanoteknologi.
Kita bisa mengambil contoh pada Proyek Penanganan Hipertensi berbasis masyarakat di Ghana, yang dilakukan oleh Yayasan Novartis, yang Saya pimpin, dan FHI 360.
Proyek ini membantu pengguna untuk mengatur jadwal mereka dengan mengingatkan mereka untuk minum obat melalui telepon seluler mereka serta memberikan saran untuk melakukan perubahan gaya hidup.
Pendekatan ini menuai kesuksesan karena fokus pada pasien dan menyampaikan informasi kepada pasien dengan menggunakan teknologi informasi (ICT) melalui alat yang mudah didapat serta telah banyak digunakan.
Di negara dengan penggunaan telepon seluler diatas 80% namun hanya sedikit yang mempunyai telepon pintar (smartphone), solusi sederhana bisa mempunyai dampak yang paling besar.  
Bagi pemberi layanan kesehatan, solusi digital dapat dilihat sebagai cara untuk meningkatkan efisiensi dibandingkan sebagai beban tambahan pada pekerjaan mereka yang sudah sangat berat.
Bekerja sama dengan orang-orang yang berpengalaman dalam memberikan layanan kesehatan dengan biaya yang kecil dapat membantu tercapainya solusi yang bisa dilakukan dalam skala besar.
Misalnya, Jaringan Telemedis yang dibuat oleh Yayasan Novartis dan para mitra kami bersama dengan Lembaga Pelayanan Kesehatan Ghana merupakan jawaban langsung dari kebutuhan di lapangan, sesuai dengan yang diungkapkan banyak pemberi layanan kesehatan, yaitu untuk meningkatkan jangkauan praktisi kesehatan.
Cukup dengan panggilan telepon, jaringan ini menghubungkan pekerja kesehatan yang berada di garis depan dengan pusat konsultasi di rumah sakit rujukan yang berjarak beberapa jam dari tempat mereka, dimana dokter umum dan spesialis bekerja 24 jam.
Dari awal, proyek ini merupakan jawaban dari kebutuhan yang telah diungkapkan untuk meningkatkan jangkauan praktisi kesehatan, dan dioperasikan penuh oleh staff Lembaga Layanan Kesehatan Ghana, yang menjadikan program ini bisa dilakukan secara berkesinambungan dalam skala yang besar.
Untuk mencapai potensi maksimal dari layanan kesehatan digital, hal ini perlu digabungkan kedalam sistem kesehatan nasional.
Hanya dengan cara ini teknologi digital bisa meningkatkan kemajuan menuju layanan kesehatan yang mencakup tingkat nasional dan mampu mengatasi kebutuhan kesehatan yang menjadi prioritas di Ghana.
Kolaborasi antara bidang kesehatan dan Teknologi Informasi dan Komunikasi (ICT), baik di sektor pemerintah maupun swasta, merupakan hal yang penting.
Kemitraan berbagai bidang yang disokong oleh kepemimpinan yang berkesinambungan dari pejabat tinggi di pemerintahan harus memandu perkembangan, yang dimulai dari tahap perencanaan.
Kolaborasi antar lembaga pemerintah, pendanaan yang secara khusus diperuntukkan bagi pengembangan solusi kesehatan digital, dan mekanisme pemerintah yang efektif juga merupakan faktor-faktor sangat penting untuk mencapai kesuksesan. 
Teknologi digital menawarkan peluang yang besar untuk meningkatkan pelayanan kesehatan.
Jika kita ingin berhasil memanfaatkan kesempatan ini, kita harus belajar dari pengalaman di masa lalu.
Dengan fokus pada kebutuhan pengguna dan pada prioritas layanan kesehatan, dibandingkan pada teknologi yang paling canggih, kita bisa mendapatkan manfaat dari pelayanan kesehatan digital.  
Africa Still Rising
JOHANNESBURG – Is the honeymoon over for African economies?
Less than a decade ago, it seemed that the continent’s economic dreams were beginning to come true, with many countries experiencing impressive GDP growth and development.
In fact, today’s high-growth countries – including Côte d’Ivoire, Ethiopia, Kenya, and Tanzania – have made substantial progress in reducing their dependence on commodity exports, in favor of trade, investment, and domestic consumption.
We believe that Africa can almost double its manufacturing output, to nearly $1 trillion, by 2025, with about 75% of that growth tied to production for local markets.
The question is whether manufacturers will manage to exploit the growth potential that lies in front of them.
African firms have not yet proved capable of meeting existing domestic demand.
Africa still imports about one-third of the food, beverages, and similar processed goods it consumes, whereas the Association of Southeast Asian Nations imports about 20%, and South America’s Mercosur trade bloc imports just 10%.
Africa even imports 15% of the cement it uses, despite having abundant raw materials to make it at home.
To be sure, African business has made great strides in recent years.
Today, 400 African companies have annual revenue of more than $1 billion, and 700 have annual revenue of more than $500 million.
On the whole, these large companies are growing faster – and generating higher profits – than their global peers.
But there is still a long way to go.
Large African (excluding South African) firms’ average annual revenue of $2 billion is half that of large firms in Brazil, India, Mexico, and Russia.
And Africa only has about 60% of the large firms it needs to put it at the same level as the emerging economies.
One key factor limiting firms’ growth is the fragmented nature of the African market, which currently comprises mostly small economies with only limited economic and political linkages.
There are eight partly overlapping regional trade zones, none of which includes more than half of Africa’s countries.
Only Egypt, Morocco, Nigeria, and South Africa rank in the top 100 of MGI’s Global Connectedness Index.
Beyond excessive trade barriers, Africa suffers from inadequate transport links and limits on the free movement of people.
Africans need visas to travel to more than half the countries on their own continent.
The recent launch of the African Union passport is a step in the right direction – but it is only one step.
A more integrated market would not only enable African companies to create the economies of scale they need to compete; it would also be far more appealing to institutional investors.
Building such a market must therefore be a top priority for African leaders, as they seek to unleash the continent’s economic potential.
Equally important, Africa’s leaders must work to improve the business environment.
Though some progress has been made on this front in the last two decades, non-tariff barriers remain high.
Indeed, regulatory issues are still cited as a serious deterrent to investment.
Many African businesses – nearly half of companies in Nigeria, and more than one-third in Angola and Egypt – highlight unreliable electricity supplies as a major challenge.
And almost 40% of firms surveyed by the World Bank lament the constraints imposed by competition from informal firms.
Some of these issues could be addressed relatively quickly.
Consider the strides Rwanda has made since 2007, when it established a development board to improve its business environment.
In less than a decade, that board has led the creation of a “one-stop center” to facilitate investment, has overseen streamlined issuance of construction permits, and has pressed successfully for a fixed fee for property registration, the extension of customs hours, and risk-based customs inspections.
As a result, Rwanda’s global ranking for the ease of doing business jumped from 143 in 2008 to 32 in 2014.
This success can surely be replicated elsewhere in Africa.
Despite the challenges some African countries face, the continent’s economic potential remains massive, thanks to favorable demographic dynamics, fast-growing cities, burgeoning domestic markets, and a digital revolution.
With the right policies, a relentless focus on execution, and a great deal of determination, Africa can still rise.
Menguji Vaksinasi di Afrika
BOSTON – Pada bulan Februari lalu di Addis Ababa, menteri kesehatan negara-negara di Afrika menandatangani sebuah deklarasi yang sangat diagungkan mengenai komitmen mereka untuk mempertahankan imunisasi sebagai upaya terdepan dalam menyelamatkan anak-anak Afrika dari kematian dan penyakit.
Pemenuhan komitmen ini tentu tidak akan mudah.
Imunisasi bukan sekedar isu kesehatan tapi merupakan tantangan ekonomi.
Argumentasi yang mendukung vaksinasi sangat kuat.
Secara global, sekitar 2-3 juta kematian anak dan 600.000 kematian dewasa dicegah setiap tahunnya melalui imunisasi.
Selain itu, imunisasi dianggap sebagai salah satu bentuk intervensi kesehatan masyarakat yang paling hemat biaya untuk menurunkan morbiditas, kematian, dan kecacatan pada anak.
Sebuah studi terbaru memperkirakan bahwa setiap 1 dolar yang dikeluarkan untuk biaya vaksinasi akan menghemat 16 dolar biaya-biaya akibat penyakit yang berhasil dikalahkan.
Dengan memperhitungkan nilai-nilai yang diprioritaskan individu pada kehidupan yang lebih sehat dan panjang, net return dalam investasi pada imunisasi bertambah menjadi 44 kali dibandingkan biayanya, dan net return ini melebihi pengeluaran untuk semua jenis vaksin.
Kemajuan yang signifikan sudah tercapai.
Pada tahun 2014, sekitar 86% anak-anak menerima imunisasi yang melindungi mereka dari penyakit difteri, tetanus, dan pertusis, dibandingkan angka di tahun 1974 yang kurang dari 5%.
Masih banyak lagi kemajuan besar dari segi jumlah dan vaksin yang tersedia.
Akan tetapi secara global sekitar 18.7 juta bayi belum terjangkau oleh layanan imunisasi yang rutin.
Permasalahannya tentunya adalah akses.
Analisis mendalam tentang imunisasi di negara-negara Afrika mengungkap kesenjangan yang besar baik di dalam negeri maupun antar negara.
Lebih dari 60% bayi yang belum mendapat imunisasi tinggal di sepuluh negara berikut: Kongo, Ethiopia, India, Indonesia, Irak, Nigeria, Pakistan, Filipina, Uganda, dan Afrika Selatan.
Cakupan imuninasi berkala masih relatif rendah terutama di Afrika, benar bahwa kondisi ini telah memburuk dalam tiga tahun terakhir dikarenakan sistem kesehatan yang lemah dan kekurangan sumber daya. sebagai akibatnya, satu dari lima anak-anak di Afrika belum mendapatkan vaksinasi yang sebetulnya bisa menyelamatkan hidup mereka.
Pada tahun 2014, sekitar 42% kematian secara global akibat penyakit campak terjadi di Afrika.
Sebagian besar anak-anak yang tidak mendapat imunisasi yang cukup hidup di Nigeria, Kongo, Sudan Selatan, Ethiopia, dan Guinea.
Penduduk miskin, masyarakat yang tinggal di pedesaaan, dan keluarga dengan tingkat pendidikan rendah adalah mayoritas warga yang belum dijangkau layanan imunisasi.
Tentu saja uang adalah faktor utama yang menentukan keluaran imunisasi.
Selain dari sistem kesehatan yang memiliki dana terbatas, sehingga sektor ini semakin lemah dan tidak efisien, terutama di wilayah pedesaan, negara-negara Afrika mengalami tantangan dalam hal pengadaan vaksin-vaksin baru yang lebih mahal.
Vaksin-vaksin baru harus memberdayakan kita untuk menyelamatkan lebih banyak jiwa.
Namun Médecins Sans Frontièresmemperkirakan bahwa pengenalan vaksin-vaksin baru di tahun 2014 menjadikan vaksinasi bagi seorang anak 68 kali lebih mahal di negara-negara Afrika dibandingkan tahun 2001.
Sebuah studi lain menunjukkan di tahun 2001, biaya total enam jenis vaksin pokok yang dianjurkan WHO adalah kurang dari satu dolar.
Pada tahun 2011, jumlah vaksin yang dianjurkan WHO bertambah menjadi 11 jenis dan biayanya mencapai $21 bagi anak laki-laki dan $35 bagi anak perempuan.
Tambahan biaya untuk pengiriman, kini sekitar $25 per anak, menjadikan total biaya untuk imunisasi lengkap bagi seorang enak sebanyak $50-60.
Studi yang sama menyimpulkan bahwa di banyak negara berpendapatan rendah dan menengah, anggaran imunisasi saat ini tidak cukup untuk mempertahankan keberlanjutan program imunisasi, apalagi untuk membiayai vaksin-vaksin baru yang lebih mahal.
Sebagaimana disepakati oleh sejumlah menteri kesehatan yang bertemu di Addis Ababa, harga vaksin yang tinggi memaksa pemerintah di negara-negara miskin untuk mengambil keputusan yang sulit sebab diharuskan memilih penyakit mematikan apa yang mampu dicegah berdasarkan kemampuan finansial mereka.
Bagi beberapa negara, situasi ini akan memburuk, seiring dengan penghentian bantuan yang diberikan Gavi, sebuah kelompok internasional yang membantu pembiayaan ekspansi vaksin-vaksin di tingkat global secara besar-besaran, terhadap negara-negara yang dianggap “lulus” dan tidak lagi layak menerima bantuan.
Tanpa kemudahan yang diberikan oleh Gavi bagi negara-negara ini untuk menerima harga yang lebih rendah, banyak diantara mereka tidak akan mampu menjangkau dan mengakses vaksin-vaksin terbaru.
Agar bisa mengatasi tantangan ini, beberapa pemimpin politik di Afrika telah berkomitmen untuk berinvestasi pada kapasitas pengembangan dan produksi vaksin mereka sendiri.
Namun ini merupakan strategi jangka panjang yang memerlukan perencanaan investasi regional yang terkoordinasi, pengembangan pasar, dan kemampuan mengatur yang lebih kuat.
Dalam jangka pendek dan menengah, negara-negara Afrika sebaiknya memanfaatkan kekuatan tawar-menawar global untuk mendapat kesepakatan yang lebih baik bagi sejumlah vaksin yang sangat dibutuhkan.
Meskipun negara-negara di Afrika bisa dan harus mengambil tindakan lebih untuk meningkatkan vaksinasi, komunitas global juga mempunyai tanggung jawab untuk melaksanakan upaya global demi menurunkan biaya vaksin.
Pengumuman terbaru tentang penurunan harga vaksin pneumococcal adalah salah satu langkah dalam jalur yang tepat namun tindakan ini saja tidak cukup.
Tanpa upaya gabungan, jaminan akan adanya akses kepada imunisasi yang mudah diakses dan berkelanjutan bagi Afrika tidak akan terpenuhi dan kita akan terus kehilangan nyawa anak-anak kita.
&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; “Where beautiful people
&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; Laugh and dance in harmony.
&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; Africa.
O Africa.”
And, indeed, these young people laughed and danced not only in harmony but with a joie de vivre that lit up their faces and filled us all with happiness.
Listening, it was hard to imagine that they could easily be dead – and would be, if not for this clinic.
Each of those splendid performers is living with HIV.
Some arrived at the clinic so ill that they could scarcely walk.
Others showed few symptoms but, having tested positive, came to be treated.
They were mothers and fathers, sisters and brothers, children and grandparents.
All were alive and healthy for one reason only: the Joint Clinical Research Center in Kampala, and the drugs that it provides them.
Uganda was the epicenter of the AIDS epidemic. There the scourge began in earnest; there (as elsewhere in Africa) it exacts its highest toll.
Yet Uganda is also a success story.
A decade ago, fewer than 10,000 people were taking the new generation of antiretroviral drugs that suppress the disease and offer the promise of a normal life.
Today, that figure is 200,000, thanks in large measure to generous support from the United States (under its PEPFAR program) and the Global Fund in Geneva.
We have seen similarly encouraging progress elsewhere.
Botswana, among others, has invested heavily to offer universal treatment, and now is well on its way to ensuring that no baby is born with HIV – a reality in developed countries, but not so in Africa, where 400,000 children are born with the disease each year.
South Africa, with the largest number of people living with HIV, has spent nearly $1 billion over the past year in an ambitious counseling and testing campaign to roll back the epidemic.
But there is a new and growing danger that these advances might not be sustained.
Peter Mugyenyi, who runs the Joint Clinical Research Center, told me that part of the problem is the sheer weight of numbers.
In Uganda, only about half of those with HIV/AIDS are being treated.
Meanwhile, money for treatment is drying up.
Because of the global recession, some international donors are threatening to cap their financial support.
Countries such as Malawi, Zimbabwe, and Kenya, as well as Uganda, are requesting assistance for emergency drug supplies.
In Kampala, Dr. Mugyenyi has begun placing new patients on a waiting list.
As many as seven million Africans who should be getting treatment for HIV are not.
Worldwide, the number is about 10 million.
Compounding the problem: donors have also been shifting their focus from AIDS to other diseases, because there is a sense that more lives can be saved more cheaply.
At a time when we should be scaling up to meet the AIDS challenge, we are dialing back.
In our global war on AIDS, the international community is on the verge of snatching defeat from the jaws of victory.
Those who rallied to the fight are alarmed. They fear that the impressive gains of the last decade will be lost.
“We are sitting on a time bomb,” Dr. Mugyenyi told me.
Every day, he is forced into moral choices that no one should have to make.
How do you choose to treat a young girl but not her little brother?
How do you turn away a pregnant mother, sitting with her children, crying for help?
Surely we can do better.
In Kampala, I promised my young friends that I would do everything I could to help.
Its inherent truth would be obvious, had you been there to see:&#160;
&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; We are still useful.
&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; To our countries, to our families.
&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; All we need is a way to live our days,
&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; All we need is to survive in Africa.
Yes, times are hard.
That is all the more reason to act out of compassion and with generosity.
Africa’s Diaspora to the Rescue
DAKAR – There is something dismally familiar about the tide of news reports concerning Africa’s increased suffering – more poverty, malnutrition, civil strife, and death – in the face of the recent global financial crisis.
Almost everywhere, the media translates academic conclusions into graphic illustrations of brutality and despair in places such as Guinea and the Democratic Republic of Congo.
But there is another, woefully under-reported, side to the story.
African countries that were locked out of international capital markets for most of the past five decades have largely been spared the twin woes of financial turmoil and economic downturn.
The continent’s economies experienced a slowdown, but not a recession.
Indeed, according to McKinsey &amp; Company, Africa was the third-largest contributor to world economic growth in 2009, after China and India.
Moreover, several African countries have received ratings from credit agencies, which has opened up global financial centers to them.
In some cases, these ratings have proved equivalent to or higher than those of countries such as Turkey or Argentina.
Stock exchanges are being established across the continent.
Furthermore, countries such as China, India, and Brazil has provided a platform for increased exports and the inception of a model of cooperation based on trade, investment, and technology transfer, rather than “aid.”
China-Africa trade alone increased from $10 billion in 2000 to $107 billion in 2008, and billions of dollars are being invested in oil production, mining, transportation, electricity generation and transmission, telecommunications, and other infrastructure.
These developments have combined to improve African countries’ macroeconomic performance dramatically.
Inflation has been halved since the 1990’s, and foreign-exchange reserves have increased 30%.
Public finances showed a 2.8%-of-GDP surplus in 2008, compared to a 1.4%-of-GDP deficit in 2000-2005.
Savings rates are between 10% and 20%, and external debt has decreased from 110% of GDP in 2005 to 21% in 2008.
Since 2000, sub-Saharan African countries have achieved economic growth of 5-7%.
Many factors have contributed to this upturn.
Emerging-market demand has pushed up commodity prices.
Urbanization has given rise to a dynamic informal sector.
Improved governance, higher food production, increased inter-regional trade, debt cancellation, better use of official development assistance (ODA), and thriving telecommunications and housing markets have helped as well.
But transfers from the African diaspora stand out as the most significant contributing factor.
A study commissioned by the Rome-based International Fund for Agricultural Development indicates that more than 30 million individuals living outside their countries of origin contribute more than $40 billion annually in remittances to their families and communities back home.
For sub-Saharan African countries, remittances increased from $3.1 billion in 1995 to $18.5 billion in 2007, according to the World Bank, representing between 9% and 24% of GDP and 80-750% of ODA.
Migrants’ remittance behavior is essentially dictated by the regulatory environment and the quality – in terms of speed, cost, security, and accessibility – of products and services offered by banks, money-transfer companies, micro-finance institutions, and informal operators.
In this respect, there are three different strategies in place in Africa.
The Anglophone strategy focuses on freeing up the remittance market by encouraging competition, relaxing regulatory constraints for non-bank operators, offering financial incentives, encouraging technical and financial innovation, and stimulating collaboration among market players.
This approach, also adopted by Italy, contributes to reducing costs and increasing the overall volume of funds for beneficiaries.
The Hispanic approach emphasizes migrants’ involvement in banking by offering a range of banking services in both the country of origin and the host country, products of specific interest to migrants, and low commissions on foreign transfers.
This approach, widely developed by Morocco and the Portuguese-speaking world, is epitomized by the zero-commission policy initiated by the Spanish bank Santander and its Moroccan counterpart, Attijariwafa Bank.
Finally, the Francophone approach relies on two types of monopoly.
The first is enjoyed by Western Union, which controls up to 90% of the total formal transfer volume within Africa’s 16-member Franc Zone.
Western Union charges fees as high as 25% on transfers to these countries, compared to an average global benchmark of 5%, and has required that Franc-Zone countries sign exclusivity agreements, thereby preventing foreign-exchange bureaux, post offices, and micro-finance institutions from carrying out money transfers.
The second monopoly is exercised in the banking sector.
France has a veto within the boards of directors of the Franc Zone’s two central banks, while two French commercial banks, BNP-Paribas and Société Générale, exercise a quasi-monopoly on lending programs, mainly centered on short-term trade financing and the needs of governments, public and private companies, and the elite.
All other local banks have adopted the same approach, severely restricting access to financial services for households and entrepreneurs.
Despite the increasing importance of remittances from Italy, Spain, and the United States, the largest share in absolute terms still originates from France.
There is thus a real need in the Franc Zone for a financing institution that would convert migrant remittances into productive investments, thereby generating jobs and wealth, and that would broaden access to banking services, mortgages, insurance products, pension plans, and technical assistance.
Official statistics for 2009 are likely to show that migrants’ remittances fell sharply, as the global recession severely eroded job opportunities abroad.
That makes it all the more important that African countries, many of which have laid a strong groundwork for sustainable growth, have a financial system in place that can leverage remittances effectively as the global economy recovers.
Africa’s Dictator-Diplomat
BRUSSELS – The recent death in Brussels of Ethiopian Prime Minister Meles Zenawi finally brings to light what lay behind his mysterious two-month disappearance from public life.
Ethiopia’s government had strenuously denied rumors of serious ill health caused by liver cancer.
Now that the worst has, indeed, proven true, Ethiopia and all of East Africa will need to learn to live without the stabilizing influence of its great dictator-diplomat.
Meles was certainly both.
Ethiopia has undergone a remarkable transformation under his strongman rule since 1991, when his Tigrayan minority group from the country’s north came to power with the overthrow of the odious Communist Derg led by Mengistu Haile Mariam (still enjoying a comfortable retirement in Robert Mugabe’s Zimbabwe).
Initially serving as the president of the first post-Derg government, and then as Ethiopia’s prime minister from 1995 until his death, Meles (his nom de guerre in the revolution) oversaw 7.7% annual GDP growth in recent years.
Strong economic performance is somewhat surprising, given his party’s interventionist policy approach, but Meles showed himself to be a consummate pragmatist in attracting investment – particularly from China – to drive growth.
Meles’s own political provenance as the leader of the Tigrayan People’s Liberation Front was Marxist-Leninist.
But, when the Cold War ended, so, too, did his dogmatism.
To his credit, child mortality was reduced by 40% under his government; Ethiopia’s economy became more diversified, with new industries like car manufacturing, beverages, and floriculture; and major infrastructure projects, including Africa’s largest hydroelectric dam, were launched.
Once a basket-case associated in the world’s eyes only with famine and drought, Ethiopia has become one of Africa’s largest economies – and without the benefit of gold or oil.
Perhaps more important than Meles’s domestic achievements was his diplomatic record.
He was an indispensable ally of the West in the fight against Islamist terrorism, culminating in Ethiopia’s military operation in neighboring Somalia in 2006.
More recently, Meles coordinated efforts with Kenya to stage limited strikes against the al-Shabaab militia, which has waged an unrelenting war to turn Somalia into a fundamentalist Islamic theocracy.
At the same time, Meles courted China as both an investor and as a hedge against the West’s criticism of his human-rights record.
And yet he controversially but rightly held out a hand of friendship to the breakaway region of Somaliland, before it became fashionable, and went as far as he could short of formal re-recognition of that ray of democratic hope in the Horn of Africa.
Meles will be sorely missed in Hargeisa, as he planned to run a Chinese-financed gas pipeline through Somaliland territory from the Ogaden to the coast.
More important, Meles put Addis Ababa on the map as the home of the African Union, and as a capital where Africa’s worst problems could be discussed in a pragmatic manner, unburdened by colonial grudges.
Meles himself became a major diplomatic player, particularly over climate-change policy, and most recently was active in mediating border and natural-resource disputes between Sudan and the newly independent (and oil-rich) South Sudan.
He will be remembered for accepting the painful secession of Eritrea in 1993, rather than prolong the civil war, and for his efforts to reach an agreement with Egypt over the use of the Blue Nile waters.
The great stain on Meles’s record will always be his intolerance of dissent.
To be sure, his human-rights record was far better than the Derg’s.
For example, he allowed a private press to flourish, and in 2000 he became the first Ethiopian leader to hold multi-party parliamentary elections.
Moreover, compared to neighboring Eritrea under President Isaias Afewerki or Omar al-Bashir’s Sudan, his regime was by no means the worst offender in the region.
Nor was there much evidence of personal enrichment or widespread corruption.
Nevertheless, following a violently contested parliamentary election in 2005, in which more than 30 parties participated, Meles demonstrated open contempt for democratic pluralism and press freedom, jailing several journalists in recent years.
At the same time, he imposed increasingly strict central control on his ethnically and linguistically diverse country.
Although nominally governed by “ethnic federalism,” where this threatened secession, as in Oromia or the Ogaden, Meles was quick to ignore the constitutional set-up.
Although he strengthened religious freedom and peaceful coexistence between Muslims and Christians, the human-rights situation in Ethiopia remained poor.
For example, groups like Freedom House and Human Rights Watch have documented widespread official repression of the Oromo people.
And yet Meles is irreplaceable – unmatched intellectually as an African leader (he dropped out of medical school, but went on to teach himself impeccable English and obtain European university degrees by correspondence), and unmatched politically at home, with no obvious successor groomed to replace him.
In the Horn of Africa, there is no leader of his stature who could ensure the stability and strong governance that the region so desperately needs.
Hailemariam Desalegn, Meles’s foreign minister, will take over Ethiopia’s government.
But there will be considerable concern in the West about the danger of a power vacuum or struggle in a geopolitically vital but fractious country –&nbsp;and just when neighboring Somalia is supposed to be undergoing a transition to a new parliament and elected government.
For his admirers and critics alike, Meles leaves behind a potent political legacy.
He will be remembered as an African leader of major historical significance: visionary, despotic, and indispensable.
Africa’s Economic House Divided
DAKAR – The world economic downturn and financial-market tremors have strained budgets across Africa.
With the exception of Ghana, and a few other states, in 2009 most African countries’ fiscal balances deteriorated.
But, thanks to prudent management of public finances during previous periods of robust growth, a significant number of African countries have endured the current crisis in better fiscal shape than during past crises.
In 2009, aggregate GDP growth in Africa averaged 1.6%, down from about 5.7% during the 2002-2008 period – but growth all the same.
Moreover, several African countries continued to implement long-term reforms to improve their business and investment climate, despite the daunting challenges presented by the crisis.
Now that international trade and global industrial production are on the mend, sub-Saharan economies look set for more robust growth, as demand for and prices of oil and other minerals rebound and general economic activity resumes.
Of course, numerous downside risks – adverse weather shocks, military conflict, and political turmoil – still can undermine the hard-earned benefits of this social and economic record.
But it is the dichotomized nature of their economies and finances that represents Africa’s most intractable structural imbalance.
Frankly, two Africa’s are emerging: a modern economy and a cash-based economy.
Across Africa, almost all governments praise – some honestly, some not – economic modernization as the cornerstone of prosperity and the yardstick by which their effectiveness should be measured. Many boast of the modernity of the financial infrastructure of their economies, which is based on an entire set of legal, regulatory, accounting, credit reporting, and payment and settlement systems.
National payment systems operate electronic-based payment products and services.
A high-value inter-bank funds-transfer system settles transactions in real time, eliminates credit risk between system participants, increases circulation of funds, and enhances monetary-policy implementation.
Banks are provided with a facility to monitor their positions in real time and hence make cost-effective investment decisions.
So far, only a few registered financial institutions, primarily offshoots of Western commercial banks, have access to such payment-system facilities.
Non-banking financial institutions such as foreign exchange bureaus, post offices, and micro-finance lenders are not admitted, even when they are financially sound and sustainable.
The effects of banks’ hijacking of national payment systems to service only the modern economy are compounded by the exclusive agreements that banks and money-transfer companies such as Western Union have signed with most African countries.
These agreements lock out non-banking entities from the highly lucrative market for migrant remittances from the African diaspora, which remain a key engine of growth.
Yet rapid urbanization everywhere in Africa has given rise to a dynamic informal sector unconnected to the modern economy.
Although marginalized by African officials, this cash-based economy is a major contributor to the continent’s productive capacity.
It employs more than 90% of the workforce and is home to 75% of the retailers.
But, despite the pivotal economic role that the informal sector plays, it has no access to conventional bank loans.
Micro-finance institutions provide the only credit lines open to informal operators.
The micro-finance business model is based on lending that is guaranteed by the group.
This translates into a solidarity network and a support mechanism that mitigates credit risk and encourages payment discipline. Credit repayment in well-managed micro-finance institutions is around 95%. All studies undertaken in the area have also revealed that women are not only the most active among informal-sector entrepreneurs, but they are also quicker to meet their commitments.
African states must now recognize that modernizing their informal sectors by integrating them into the modern economy can be a major development tool. Yet only a few countries have started moving in that direction.
Nigeria has refrained from signing any exclusive agreements with Western Union and others, and its newly consolidated banking industry is making significant inroads across the region.
Rwanda, too, has enacted regulations that eliminate exclusive agreements, opening doors for micro-finance institutions to become payment-service providers.
The South African Reserve Bank has created a special platform within its national payment system for micro-finance institutions and non-banks.
Malawi’s national payments system is directly accessible to non-bank participants, including third-party service providers.
Giving micro-finance institutions access to national and regional payments systems and electronic retail facilities will go a long way toward meeting the requirements of the retail and business sector in terms of banking facilities.
It will also help facilitate access by the poorest to financial services, thus helping to reduce the high proportion of the un-banked population.
All of this will invariably spur development and integration of national financial systems and intra-regional trade.
This will be a welcome development, because a large proportion of intra-regional trade is carried out by informal operators and small and medium enterprises that do not have access to the banking system.
Moreover, economic integration and increased intra-regional trade are the best entry point into global markets for all countries.
When it comes to analyzing what ails Africa, it is customary to dwell at length on the continent’s traumatic past.
But it strains the imagination to link Africa’s colonial-era pains with the willingness of African leaders to spend a fortune to equip their countries with state-of-the-art settlement systems, and then proceed to exclude their citizens from using them.
Abraham Lincoln once said that a house divided cannot stand.
There is an economic corollary to this: an economic house divided cannot prosper.
Africa’s Hard Black Gold
LAGOS - Few infrastructure services in the developed world may be as taken for granted as electric power.
To consumers in industrialized countries, uninterrupted power supply is a given.
Not so in much of Africa, which experiences some of the world’s greatest power deficits, and where only two in ten people have access to electricity.
According to the International Monetary Fund’s most recent Regional Economic Outlook for Sub-Saharan Africa , in 2007 alone, nearly two-thirds of the countries in the region experienced an acute energy crisis marked by frequent and extended electricity outages.
There is no shortage of hydropower plants for electricity generation in Africa.
However, many of these plants are unable to keep up with rapid population growth and attendant increases in demand.
Furthermore, they are prone to frequent drought, which reduces their output significantly, leaving many as little more than decorative infrastructure landmarks.
Increasingly burgeoning populations in countries like Nigeria and Ghana imply a greater extraction of water resources for power generation.
Rapid expansion of agricultural activity is requiring more and more water all across the continent.
Other resources like fuel oil, diesel, light crude, solar, and gas are also available as means of electricity generation, but their costs are all quite prohibitive.
These factors make a good argument for coal as a cheap alternative source of Africa's power.
Coal has historically played a crucial role as a source of energy worldwide, and has several important advantages over other fossil fuels.  First is its relative abundance.
The current level of proven coal reserves worldwide stands at roughly 850 billion tons.
Africa has about 50 billion tons.
Coal is also much more widely distributed geographically than any other fossil fuel.
Worldwide energy demand has increased by more than 50% since 1980, and is expected to grow annually by 1.6% between now and 2030.
More than 70% of this new demand will come from developing countries, with fossil fuels projected to account for about 80% of total energy demand by the end of this period.
Coal is the world’s fastest growing fossil fuel, with annual production increasing by 6.4% since 2004.
It is already the dominant source of power generation in some very important energy-consuming nations.
Much of the future increases in coal-fired electricity generation will come from strategically important developing countries like China and India.
In 2006 alone, China added about 93,000 megawatts of coal- fired electricity generating capacity, and this trend is expected to continue as the country tries to meet its huge energy needs.
Even in many developed countries, coal still accounts for a large share of power generation.
Coal plants currently provide more than half of America’s electricity supply.
Denmark, which houses some of the most efficient coal-fired power plants in the world, equally relies on coal for half of its electricity production.
The same is true for Germany, which is home to some of the most efficient pulverized coal combustion units in Europe.
Poland uses coal for 98% of its electricity production, and South Africa uses coal for about 50% of its electricity production.
Against this picture then, it is hard not to expect developing countries to exploit their abundant coal resources to generate power for their own development, especially given that modern technology can help produce coal cleanly.
Some argue that gas might be a better alternative to hydro or coal, but for countries that must import much of their gas the benefits of a stable and reliable source of cheap fuel in the form of coal present a very strong counter-argument to the capital costs of a gas plant.
Unlike prices for coal, which is abundant and dispersed geographically, gas prices are subject to significant volatility, and the long-term trend in the face of fossil fuel depletion is uncertain.
In contrast, coal prices are more stable, and may remain that way for a long time.
Apart from electric-power generation, coal also has wide application in a number of industries.
It is pivotal in both steel and cement production.
Moreover, the use of wood by Africa’s growing population is causing increasingly rapid deforestation in many countries.
There is significant potential domestic demand for coal briquettes to replace wood for cooking and domestic and industrial heating.
The demand outlook thus appears favorable for the coal industry, creating significant investment opportunities.
Clearly, there are environmental drawbacks from the use of coal as an energy resource, and these concerns are far too important to overlook.
The massive reserves notwithstanding, coal is still a finite resource.
It must be mined with greater efficiency and with a view to mitigating the environmental impact.
Fortunately, much greater attention is paid today to mine safety and the management of the by-products of coal use.
With acid rain and other public-health hazards linked to coal combustion, more technologies are emerging for reducing harmful emissions from power plants.
Fueled by research, the past few years have witnessed the development of increasingly cleaner and more energy-efficient coal-fired generation plants and the retirement of older technologies, especially in the developed world.
Developing countries have lagged behind in this process, but, with the common threat of global warming, there is now growing pressure to adopt conservation policies.
Africa's mineral-rich countries must exploit their abundant natural resources.
They must use coal to advance their economic development.
Failure to do so would be a missed opportunity at a time when African countries must avail themselves of all available resources for poverty reduction.
Africa’s Immunity
ACCRA – The United States suffers rising job losses.
Britain nationalizes its banks.
Once high-flying small economies like Ireland, Hungary, and Iceland break down.
Even robust China and India are experiencing slower growth, curtailed ambitions, and broken dreams.
Yet, in sub-Saharan Africa, there are few hints of the global financial crisis that is consuming the capitalist world.
In fashionable African cities, residential home prices remain stratospheric.
A typical Western-style house in Kampala or Accra, for example, now costs an astonishing two to three times the price of a comparable home in, say, Cleveland or other cities in the American heartland.
While home prices are crashing from Madrid to Dublin and Miami to Los Angeles, African prices remain near or at record-high levels.
African banks, meanwhile, are rock-solid compared to their debt-heavy counterparts in the US and Europe.
While international bankers went bust by making legions of bad loans, African bankers stuck to earning profits the old-fashioned way: paying very little to depositors, and earning a big “spread” by buying guaranteed government debt, which yielded healthy returns.
Even government deficit spending – long the bane of Africa – seems positively puny compared to the massive debts that the US and some European countries face.
The new Obama administration is proposing spending plans that would create a record US deficit of more than one trillion dollars – and this coming on top of the outgoing Bush administration’s record deficit.
And yet there are good reasons to believe that it is just a matter of time before Africa and its peoples experience the ill effects of the global crisis.
From Ghana to Kenya, governments are having increased difficulty in raising money for infrastructure projects and selling official debt.
Foreign investment in sub-Saharan Africa, which reached record levels in recent years, is retreating, which is evidence of investor caution, not any underlying lack of optimism about the region.
And exports of raw materials to China, India, Europe, and the US – a key factor in Africa’s recent growth surge – may suffer simply because the global slowdown means less consumption everywhere.
All of these factors suggest that an African financial bust is possible.
Popular equity investments, such as shares in Safaricom, are already trading at unexpectedly low levels.
If real estate prices were to fall dramatically, a chain reaction could occur, taking down big and small investors alike, and over time causing wide suffering to ordinary Africans.
Even assuming stability in real estate prices, the global crisis surely will cause a fall in remittances by Africans working good jobs in Europe, the US, Canada, Australia, and the Middle East.
Remittances are already believed to be falling, which makes sense: immigrants in rich countries are and will be disproportionately hurt by slowing economic activity.
Immigration itself may even slow dramatically, depending on the length and depth of the economic slowdown.
Fewer Africans working in rich countries will automatically translate into less money circulating in African countries.
The decline in remittances, however, cuts both ways.
Remittances have long spurred inflation in many parts of Africa.
A Ugandan doctor working in Norway, for instance, cares little about the cost of a beer in Kampala.
He is also willing – and able – to pay more than a local doctor for services and, of course, a home in Uganda.
Fewer remittances flowing into Uganda could mean less economic activity – or simply lower prices.
The financial meltdown in the US, which incubated the global crisis, is either coming under control or threatening to mutate into a new, more virulent form that could destroy not only America’s paper economy of trading and brokering, but also its real economy of goods and services.
President Barack Obama, acting as if the latter scenario remains likely, is betting on large-scale government spending to prop up the real economy.
If his administration succeeds, the chances that Africa will remain relatively unscathed will grow.
Even if Obama fails, however, Africans should escape the worst of the global crisis, for both good reasons and bad.
The good reasons have to do with African self-reliance and a growing awareness among scholars and policymakers that trade within the region – especially between urban and rural Africa – will ultimately deliver enormous benefits.
Another factor working in Africa’s favor is its private companies’ and consumers’ low dependence on borrowed money.
People tend to pay cash for goods and services, however costly.
In the US, loans for cars and homes – loans that now aren’t being paid back – are the major factor behind the financial crisis.
In Africa, very few people borrow money for such purchases.
Africa’s cash-based economy has in the past constrained development.
After all, by allowing people to spend more than they have, borrowed money can fuel growth.
But today, Africa’s pay-as-you-go practices are a powerful defense against financial contagion.
Another way of looking at Africa’s paradoxical economic position is to admit that the region’s historical marginalization within the international financial system – so costly in times of global plenty – is proving to be an unexpected benefit when the wealthiest of the world are sick unto death.
Menjamin Keberlanjutan Pertumbuhan di Afrika
LAGOS – Pertumbuhan di Afrika terancam melemah.
Setelah bertahun-tahun benua ini memperoleh rata-rata pertumbuhan ekonomi tahunan sebanyak 5%, ketidakpastian global, merosotnya harga komoditas, dan kondisi eksternal yang sulit mulai mengancam kemajuan selama beberapa dekade yang sangat dibutuhkan di Afrika.
Menjamin kesejahteraan dan penghidupan penduduk di benua tidak mudah tapi banyak tindakan yang bisa diambil pembuat kebijakan untuk memulihkan pembangunan di Afrika.
Pertama dan terpenting, pembuat kebijakan harus menjamin adanya dana yang diperlukan untuk pembangunan berkelanjutan di tengah situasi global yang tidak menentu.
Bank Dunia memperkirakan Afrika membutuhkan setidaknya $93 miliar per tahun untuk membiayai kebutuhan infrastrukturnya saja.
Infrastruktur ramah iklim dan berkelanjutan memerlukan biaya lebih besar.
Selama pertumbuhan global masih lemah, penduduk Afrika tidak bisa tergantung pada negara-negara maju untuk sepenuhnya memenuhi komitmen mereka dalam membantu Afrika mewujudkan Tujuan Pembangunan Berkelanjutan (SDGs).
Afrika harus segera mengembangkan sumber dayanya sendiri, dimulai dengan melipatgandakan pendapatan dari pajak.
Di Afrika Sub-Sahara, pendapatan yang berasal dari pajak hanya menyumbangkan kurang dari seperlima PDB, dibandingkan di negara-negara OECD yang rasionya sepertiga PDB.
Hal ini berarti banyak ruang perbaikan.
Sejak tahun 1990 hingga 2004, misalnya, Ghana mengubah sistem pajak dan menambah pendapatan dari 11% menjadi 22% PDB-nya.
Tentu keberhasilan ini tidak mudah; di Nigeria kami melihat adanya peluang meningkatkan penerimaan pajak non-minyak namun ini sulit diraih.
Sumber daya lain bagi kawasan adalah aset dana pensiun sekitar $380 miliar yang saat ini dikelola oleh 10 negara Afrika saja.
Pembuat kebijakan harus lebih mengoptimalkan penggunaan dana ini.
Di saat yang sama, negara-negara Afrika perlu mencari cara untuk diversifikasi ekonomi.
Diversifikasi ini membutuhkan adanya investasi di masa depan dalam bentuk pendidikan dan infrastruktur yang solid, termasuk telekomunikasi, listrik, pembangunan jalan, kereta api, dan air.
Terdapat beberapa model yang bisa diteladani: Dubai, Singapura, Thailand, Malaysia, Meksiko, Indonesia, dan Korea Selatan adalah contoh yang dikagumi negara-negara Afrika sebagai negara yang berhasil melakukan transformasi.
Dubai, misalnya, sejak tiga tahun lalu mulai menyiapkan masa depan tanpa penerimaan minyak.
Pemerintah menerapkan transformasi bertahap menuju perekonomian sektor jasa, membangun infrastruktur dan insentif yang diperlukan untuk mengembangkan jasa keuangan, pariwisata, pelayanan medis, real estate, media, seni, dan budaya.
Korea Selatan dan Singapura, kedua negara dengan sumber daya alam yang terbatas, juga mengilhami kita.
Rahasia di balik kesuksesan negara-negara ini adalah pemimpin yang fokus dan tidak kenal lelah, baik itu diktator baik hati (benevolent) atau politisi yang dipilih secara demokratis yang memiliki visi bersama tentang ekonomi yang broad-based.
Afrika Sub-Sahara memiliki potensi pembangunan terdiversifikasi yang bahkan tidak dimiliki negara-negara pelopor: industri pertanian dan agroindustri yang bernilai tambah, pemrosesan sumber daya mineral, kompleks petrokimia, manufaktur barang konsumsi dan tahan lama, pariwisata dan hiburan, serta sektor teknologi informasi yang berkembang.
Seiring dengan diterapkannya langkah-langkah diversifikasi, pembuat kebijakan harus memastikan bahwa pertumbuhan ekonomi akan menciptakan lapangan kerja.
Sayangnya, tujuan ini tidak selalu berhasil diwujudkan.
Sebagian besar pertumbuhan yang dicapai akhir-akhir ini hanya menguntungkan segelintir orang sementara mayoritas masih tertinggal – terutama pemuda dan perempuan.
Sejak tahun 2006 hingga 2013, ketimpangan meluas di sejumlah negara besar di Afrika, termasuk Afrika Selatan, Nigeria, Ghana, Tanzania, dan Rwanda.
Ini adalah sejumlah tantangan yang mulai dipecahkan di Nigeria ketika saya menjabat sebagai menteri keuangan.
Kami tahu bahwa kita harus lebih dari sekedar mempertahankan pertumbuhan, tapi juga meningkatkan kualitas pertumbuhan tersebut.
Dengan demikian, pembuat kebijakan harus memastikan agar pertumbuhan disalurkan ke sektor-sektor yang akan menghasilkan lapangan kerja, seperrti pertanian, manufaktur, dan jasa.
Pembuat kebijakan harus mendistribusikan ulang pendapatan dan menguatkan jaring pengaman sosial agar bisa lebih melindungi kelompok terbawah.
Mencocokkan keterampilan dengan kesempatan kerja juga sangat penting.
Sekitar 70% penduduk Afrika berusia di bawah 30 tahun dan di benua ini terdapat setengah anak-anak usia sekolah di seluruh dunia yang kehilangan kesempatan belajar.
Mengajarkan keterampilan dasar membaca, menulis, dan teknologi bagi anak-anak, serta pelatihan kejuruan, teknis, dan kewirausahaan harus menjadi prioritas utama.
Sistem pelayanan kesehatan yang lemah juga harus diperkuat guna mengatasi penyakit endemik yang menyerang produktivitas, seperti malaria, serta meningkatkan kesiapan menghadapi wabah atau epidemi yang mematikan.
Memang betul risikonya tinggi.
Bank Dunia memperkirakan wabah ebola melemahkan perekonomian Sierra Leone, Guinea, dan Liberia hingga 16%.
Seiring dengan ekonomi dunia yang mulai ramai, negara-negara Afrika harus mengembangkan perdagangan dengan sesama negara di kawasan Afrika.
Pada tahun 2013, barang dan jasa dari Afrika hanya menyumbangkan 16% perdagangan di dalam kawasan dan hanya 3% perdagangan dunia.
Salah satu permasalahannya adalah mayoritas negara-negara Afrika memproduksi komoditas yang sama dan menjualnya dengan sedikit nilai tambah.
Pembuat kebijakan harus mendorong spesialisasi; pembedaan barang dan jasa akan menciptakan nilai tambah dan meningkatkan volume perdagangan.
Proyek jalur kereta api Rift Valley, yang pada akhirnya akan menghubungkan Mombassa di pesisir Kenya ke Kampala di Uganda, merupakan contoh bagus yang menunjukkan manfaat yang bisa diperoleh dari investasi di bidang transportasi.
Bank Pembangunan Afrika memperkirakan proyek ini akan melipatgandakan volume perdagangan antar kedua negara sekaligus mengurangi biaya marginal sebanyak 30%.
Bersamaan dengan investasi ini, pembuat kebijakan tidak boleh lupa bahwa sebagian besar pertumbuhan di Afrika baru-baru ini dimungkinkan berkat kebijakan-kebijakan makro ekonomi yang baik dan pengelolaan ekonomi yang solid.
Perluasan pertumbuhan di benua Afrika mengharuskan adanya penguatan pokok-pokok perekonomian kawasan.
Ini berarti memastikan harga-harga dalam perekonomian diberlakukan dengan benar, dimulai dengan nilai tukar.
Beberapa negara mungkin memerlukan batasan-batasan sementara untuk meredam aliran modal keluar, tapi pembuat kebijakan harus mengupayakan nilai tukar berdasarkan pasar dan rencana yang kuat untuk mengendalikan inflasi, utang, cadangan devisa, neraca transaksi berjalan, dan cadangan fiskal.
Afrika memiliki potensi yang luar biasa besar.
Benua ini berpotensi mengembangkan diversifikasi ekonomi berdasarkan infrastruktur rendah karbon dan berkelanjutan.
Tetapi pembuat kebijakan tidak bisa terus berasumsi bahwa pertumbuhan ini akan berlangsung terus-menerus, mereka harus mengambil langkah yang tepat untuk memastikannya.
Africa’s Urban Farmers
NAIROBI – When I met Eunice Wangari at a Nairobi coffee shop recently, I was surprised to hear her on her mobile phone, insistently asking her mother about the progress of a corn field in her home village, hours away from the big city.
A nurse, Wangari counts on income from farming to raise money to buy more land – for more farming.
Even though Wangari lives in Kenya’s capital, she is able to reap hundreds of dollars a year in profit from cash crops grown with the help of relatives.
Her initial stake – drawn from her nursing wages of about $350 a month – has long since been recovered.
Wangari is one of thousands of urban workers in Kenya – and one of hundreds of thousands, even millions, across Africa – who are increasing their incomes through absentee agriculture.
With prices for basic foodstuffs at their highest levels in decades, many urbanites feel well rewarded by farming.
In Uganda, Vice President Gilbert Bukenya routinely travels the country, promoting higher-value farming, such as dairy production.
Perhaps the most visible political support for absentee agriculture is in Liberia, a small West African country where civil war destroyed agriculture, rendering the population dependent on food imports, even today.
President Johnson-Sirleaf, recognizing that educated people could contribute much to an agriculture revival, launched her “Back to the Soil” campaign in June 2008 in large part to encourage urban dwellers to farm.
To be sure, absentee farming by elites and educated urban workers can’t solve all of Africa’s urgent food needs.
Moreover, absentee farmers face unexpected problems.
Because they don’t visit their fields often, they rely heavily on relatives and friends.  When I decided to farm wheat for the first time this spring on leased land in my childhood village, my mother agreed to supervise plowing, planting, and harvesting.
Without her help, I might not have farmed at all.
Even with mother’s help, I have worries.
Although I grew up around wheat fields, my knowledge of farming is thin.
Fertilizer and spraying were both more expensive than I thought.
While my wheat stalks are sprouting on schedule, I now fear that at harvest time – in November – prices will fall and I won’t recoup my costs.
One key tool is the mobile phone.
My hopes for success are buoyed by my ability to call my mother inexpensively and discuss the farm.
We even decided over the phone what kind of pesticide to use and which tractor company to hire.
Because they know both the tastes of fellow city dwellers and rural conditions, many urban farmers are succeeding.
In fact, some city dwellers don’t even bother with acquiring land or gaining distant help. Certain crops can be grown in their own homes.
James Memusi, an accountant, grows mushrooms in a spare bedroom, selling them to nearby hotels and supermarkets.
Nevertheless, most people living in Africa’s cities have access to land in the countryside, which is why Liberia’s government rightly highlights the potential for farm expansion.
In a new advertising campaign rolled out this summer, the authorities declared, “The soil is a bank; invest in it.”
In Liberia, the main push is to reduce imports of staples such as rice and tomatoes.
In more prosperous countries, African elites are motivated by a complex interplay of national pride, dietary concerns, and the pursuit of profit.
In Zambia, for example, Sylva Banda ignited a craze for authentic traditional meals two decades ago with a chain of popular restaurants.
Now, ordinary Lusakans want to cook similar meals in their own homes, driving demand for farmers who produce such delicacies as dried pumpkin, “black jack” leaves, and fresh Okra.
Similarly, in Nairobi, Miringo Kinyanjui, another woman entrepreneur, is supplying unrefined – and more nutritious – maize and wheat flour.
In another move to distinguish her ingredients from Western versions, Kinyanjui also sells through grocery stores flour flavored with Amarathan, a green vegetable that grows around Kenya.
The revival of traditional foods has attracted the attention of large multinational corporations.
Last year, Unilever’s Kenyan branch ran a “taste our culture” campaign in support of its line of traditional East African herbs and spices.
Such campaigns go hand-in-hand with expanded farming, because sellers of these foods prefer nearby growers – even if these growers increasingly live in the city.
After Assimilation
Human migration is as old as history. Even migration to distant places and remote cultures is nothing new.
In the nineteenth century, millions of Europeans sought liberty and prosperity in the Americas, notably in the United States.
What is new today is the scale of migration, often across huge cultural divides - and often without a definite aim.
The African boat people in the Mediterranean are often not even sure whether they want to be in Italy, Germany, or Britain.
Even those who are certain, like North Africans in Spain and France, or Turks in Germany, had as their priority escaping the hopelessness of their home countries, not arriving at a particular destination.
This modern form of migration raises massive problems for countries on the receiving end. In Europe, it is probably the most serious social issue today, because no one has a clear idea about how to manage the resulting clash of cultures.
Once upon a time, North America, notably the US, seemed to provide the answer.
Even in Israel, the last true immigration country - at least for Jews - assimilation is no longer so easy.
Recent newcomers from Russia have their own political party, and old Europeans have become a distinct minority.
Israel and America continue to have mechanisms to integrate new migrants.
Language is an important underlying factor, and in Israel, there is the army, while in America, the values embodied in the Constitution still represent a shared secular faith.
But these mechanisms are weakening everywhere, and are virtually non-existent in European countries.
Modern societies are characterized by acute problems of belonging.
They don't offer the implicit, unconscious ties of community that citizens felt in the past. As a result, people have begun to cling to other, more primordial group identities.
They resist assimilation, fearing that it will rob them of their identity without offering a new one.
What then is the alternative to assimilation?
The "salad bowl" of so-called multiculturalism is no real alternative, because it does not provide the necessary glue that binds communities together.
All the ingredients remain separate from the outset.
The only viable alternative for which there are examples is probably that of London or New York. The main characteristic of this alternative is the coexistence of a common public sphere shared by all and a considerable degree of cultural separation in the "private" sphere, notably in residential areas.
The public space is multicultural in terms of people's backgrounds, but is governed by agreed values, even a common language, whereas the people's private lives are - to use an ugly word - ghettoized.
In theory, this is a distinctly second-best solution to the cultural consequences of migration; in practice it is the best answer we have.
But it cannot be had for nothing.
Even the necessary minimum of a common language requires a deliberate effort, to say nothing of certain rules of behavior.
Living in London, I marvel at the way in which we Londoners have come to terms with Indian family shops and West Indian-run public transport, while not asking many questions about whole districts that are Bangladeshi or Chinese.
No one has yet found a name for this new version of the "separate but equal" doctrine that some of us fought so hard against in the 1960's: separate private lives in a common public space that is equal for all.
This is clearly easier in London and New York than it is in smaller towns or even in the capitals of countries where the world language of English is not spoken.
Berlin's Turkish community and the North African communities around Paris seem increasingly separate, with their own public sphere and often language.
Where this happens, an explosive condition can arise, a kind of separatism within, not by historically separate groups but by newcomers against natives.
If we are forced to abandon the hope of assimilation, our efforts should concentrate on creating a public space to which all contribute and that all enjoy.
Ideally, this should be an expanding public space, for in the end, the element of unity in a modern society is the guarantee of its citizens' liberty.
After Austerity
NEW YORK – This year’s annual meeting of the International Monetary Fund made clear that Europe and the international community remain rudderless when it comes to economic policy.
Financial leaders, from finance ministers to leaders of private financial institutions, reiterated the current mantra: the crisis countries have to get their houses in order, reduce their deficits, bring down their national debts, undertake structural reforms, and promote growth.
Confidence, it was repeatedly said, needs to be restored.
It is a little precious to hear such pontifications from those who, at the helm of central banks, finance ministries, and private banks, steered the global financial system to the brink of ruin – and created the ongoing mess.
Worse, seldom is it explained how to square the circle.
How can confidence be restored as the crisis economies plunge into recession?
How can growth be revived when austerity will almost surely mean a further decrease in aggregate demand, sending output and employment even lower?
This we should know by now: markets on their own are not stable.
Not only do they repeatedly generate destabilizing asset bubbles, but, when demand weakens, forces that exacerbate the downturn come into play.
Unemployment, and fear that it will spread, drives down wages, incomes, and consumption – and thus total demand.
Decreased rates of household formation – young Americans, for example, are increasingly moving back in with their parents – depress housing prices, leading to still more foreclosures.
States with balanced-budget frameworks are forced to cut spending as tax revenues fall – an automatic destabilizer that Europe seems mindlessly bent on adopting.
There are alternative strategies.
Some countries, like Germany, have room for fiscal maneuver. Using it for investment would enhance long-term growth, with positive spillovers to the rest of Europe.
A long-recognized principle is that balanced expansion of taxes and spending stimulates the economy; if the program is well designed (taxes at the top, combined with spending on education), the increase in GDP and employment can be significant.
Europe as a whole is not in bad fiscal shape; its debt-to-GDP ratio compares favorably with that of the United States.
If each US state were totally responsible for its own budget, including paying all unemployment benefits, America, too, would be in fiscal crisis.
The lesson is obvious:&#160; the whole is more than the sum of its parts.
If Europe – particularly the European Central Bank – were to borrow, and re-lend the proceeds, the costs of servicing Europe’s debt would fall, creating room for the kinds of expenditure that would promote growth and employment.
There are already institutions within Europe, such as the European Investment Bank, that could help finance needed investments in the cash-starved economies.
The EIB should expand its lending.
There need to be increased funds available to support small and medium-size enterprises – the main source of job creation in all economies – which is especially important, given that credit contraction by banks hits these enterprises especially hard.
Europe’s single-minded focus on austerity is a result of a misdiagnosis of its problems.
Greece overspent, but Spain and Ireland had fiscal surpluses and low debt-to-GDP ratios before the crisis.
Giving lectures about fiscal prudence is beside the point.
Taking the lectures seriously – &#160;even adopting tight budget frameworks –&#160;can be counterproductive.
Regardless of whether Europe’s problems are temporary or fundamental – the eurozone, for example, is far from an “optimal” currency area, and tax competition in a free-trade and free-migration area can erode a viable state – austerity will make matters worse.
The consequences of Europe’s rush to austerity will be long-lasting and possibly severe.
If the euro survives, it will come at the price of high unemployment and enormous suffering, especially in the crisis countries.
And the crisis itself almost surely will spread.
Firewalls won’t work, if kerosene is simultaneously thrown on the fire, as Europe seems committed to doing: there is no example of a large economy – and Europe is the world’s largest – recovering as a result of austerity.
As a result, society’s most valuable asset, its human capital, is being wasted and even destroyed.
Young people who are long deprived of a decent job – and youth unemployment in some countries is approaching or exceeding 50%, and has been unacceptably high since 2008 – become alienated.
When they eventually find work, it will be at a much lower wage.
Normally, youth is a time when skills get built up; now, it is a time when they atrophy.
So many economies are vulnerable to natural disasters – earthquakes, floods, typhoons, hurricanes, tsunamis –&#160;that adding a man-made disaster is all the more tragic.
But that is what Europe is doing.
Indeed, its leaders’ willful ignorance of the lessons of the past is criminal.
The pain that Europe, especially its poor and young, is suffering is unnecessary.
Fortunately, there is an alternative.
But delay in grasping it will be very costly, and Europe is running out of time.
After Kyoto
The Kyoto Protocol treaty has now entered into force for the 126 nations who have joined it so far.
Now is the time to start thinking about how to engage all nations, including large emitters, in conversations about what to do after the treaty’s expiration in 2012.
This is exactly what the European Commission did recently by providing its first strategy for a post-Kyoto era, which will be discussed by the European Council next March.
While the Kyoto Protocol represents only a modest reduction of carbon emissions in industrialized countries – 5.2% between 2008-2012 relative to 1990 levels, with varying targets for individual countries – real progress can be made in sustaining development efforts and preserving our planet.
But first, all countries must integrate climate concerns into policy planning, and improve their governance in key sectors such as energy, infrastructure, and transport.
In other words, we must act in accordance with the recognition that climate change and its effects on people in both rich and poor countries remains a threat to global security.
At the end of the day, the long-term approach is likely to include a rules-based system, an incentives system, and investments in technology change.
Increasingly, adaptation at the national level will be recognized as a major issue that will require appropriate funding.
Dealing with the impacts of climate change and with emission reductions should not be mutually exclusive, but complementary.
Looking ahead to the post-Kyoto world offers us the chance to start a new dialogue and to look at new options on climate change.
Nations could set the more ambitious goal of limiting the long-term change in the earth’s temperature, and then assign emissions rights among countries in such a way that will eventually limit temperature increases to an acceptable level.
This would require increasing investments in energy research and development for new and improved technologies – a process that needs to be supported by stronger public-private partnerships.
Up to now, with only 15% of the world’s population, rich countries have been responsible for more than 75% of global carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions, and thus most of the environmental damage.
However, it is the developing countries – and thus the world’s poor – who are most vulnerable.
It is unrealistic to ask poor countries, where more than 1.6 billion people do not have access to clean energy and technologies, to bear the costs associated with the much needed technological change.
Working with partners, the World Bank is supporting financial strategies to assist developing countries in meeting the costs caused by climate change.
To date, over $1 billion dollars in Global Environment Facility (GEF) grants, together with about $8 billion in co-financing, have been committed to programs related to climate change.
While the regulatory mechanisms of both Kyoto and the European Trading Scheme have contributed to the establishment of an emerging market for carbon trading, interested parties are now concerned about the immediate future.
Without a regulatory framework beyond 2012, the window of opportunity for initiating project-based transactions will close by 2006/2007.
Given the long lead time between project preparation and the first benefits of emissions reductions, project developers have only a few years to act before carbon payments cease to make a meaningful contribution to project finance in the current context.
Developing infrastructure projects is a long process that requires 3-7 years from identification, through licensing, financing, and construction, and finally to the first certification of carbon emission reductions.
Therefore, projects need to be operational at the latest by 2007.
The World Bank has been instrumental in advancing carbon finance as a viable development tool, and in facilitating private-sector participation in the market.
The Bank is focused on representing the interests of its borrowing countries, helping them to develop assets for carbon trading according to their own priorities.
But, without a commitment by governments to limit greenhouse gas emissions beyond 2012, the carbon market will remain uncertain, and the private sector – vital to the market’s success – is unlikely to expand its participation in a meaningful and sustained way.
According to a recent World Bank-supported survey of companies interested in carbon finance, only one in five respondents declared that they were interested in buying post-2012 emissions reductions.
Now is the chance to look forward and enlist the global community – with no exclusions, although with differentiated responsibilities – in the pursuit of a more secure world, one that avoids the dire risks of environmental degradation and social conflict implied by inaction.
Selepas Serangan di Paris
NEW YORK – Sejumlah serangan di Paris yang dilakukan oleh beberapa pelaku yang terkait dengan Islamic State atau ISIS (Negara Islam Irak dan Suriah), yang terjadi setelah dua bom meledak di Beirut dan jatuhnya pesawat Rusia di Semenanjung Sinai, kembali menegaskan fakta bahwa ancaman teroris telah memasuki fase baru dan semakin berbahaya.
Alasan mengapa ISIS memutuskan untuk melakukan serangannya sekarang masih berupa dugaan; barangkali ISIS memperluas terornya ke tingkat global untuk mengimbangi kehilangan wilayah mereka di Irak.
Tetapi, apapun alasannya, wajib bagi kita untuk memberi respon jelas.
Sebetulnya, tantangan yang ditimbulkan ISIS justru menjadi seruan bagi kita untuk menerapkan beberapa tindakan, sebab tidak ada kebijakan tunggal yang memadai.
Berbagai upaya perlu diterapkan di berbagai bidang.
Pertama, militer.
Serangan udara yang lebih kuat untuk melemahkan aset-aset militer, fasilitas minyak dan gas, dan para pemimpin ISIS sangat penting.
Meskipun demikian, serangan udara saja tidak akan cukup.
Unsur militer yang kuat di darat juga diperlukan jika ingin mengambil alih dan mempertahankan wilayah darat.
Sayangnya, kita tidak punya cukup waktu untuk membangun kekuatan gabungan di darat dari nol.
Upaya ini sudah dicoba namun gagal, dan negara-negara Arab tidak mampu atau tidak mau membentuk armadanya.
Tentara Irak pun gagal memenuhi harapan.
Kelompok milisi yang didukung Iran justru memperburuk keadaan.
Pilihan terbaik adalah bekerja sama lebih erat dengan tentara Kurdi dan memilih warga dari suku Sunni di Irak dan Suriah.
Hal ini berarti menyediakan intelijen, senjata, dan kemauan untuk menugaskan lebih banyak tentara – lebih dari 3.500 tentara Amerika sudah bertugas disana dan kemungkinan akan ada penambahan 10.000 tentara – untuk melatih, memberi masukan, dan membantu mengarahkan tindakan militer.
Upaya seperti ini harus bersifat kolektif.
Bentuknya bisa informal – “koalisi negara-negara yang bersedia” (coalition of the willing) yang meliputi Amerika Serikat, Perancis, Britania Raya, negara-negara Arab, dan bahkan Rusia dalam kondisi yang tepat – atau dilaksanakan di bawah naungan NATO atau PBB.
Tidak masalah apapun bentuk atau kemasannya, yang penting adalah hasilnya.
Tetapi, deklarasi perang secara simbolis haruslah dipertimbangkan dengan penuh kehati-hatian, jangan sampai ISIS terkesan memenangi perang ini.
Komponen diplomasi pun tidak kalah penting dibanding tindakan lainnya.
Presiden Suriah, Bashar al-Assad, adalah sosok yang layaknya menjadi recruiting tools bagi ISIS dan harus dicopot dari jabatannya.
Siapapun yang meneruskan jabatan beliau harus mampu menjaga ketertiban dan melarang ISIS memanfaatkan kekosongan kekuasaan, seperti yang terjadi di Libya.
Selain itu, perubahan politik yang teratur hanya akan dimungkinkan melalui dukungan Rusia dan Iran.
Satu opsi jangka pendek yang patut dicoba adalah pembentukan pemerintah koalisi yang masih dipimpin oleh perwakilan dari kelompok minoritas Alawite, suatu persetujuan yang sepadan dengan mencopot jabatan Assad.
Secara prinsip, dan seiring berjalannya waktu, pemerintah pusat yang lebih representatif akan terbentuk, walaupun pembahasan mengenai rencana pemilihan umum dalam waktu 18 bulan ke depan nampaknya terlalu bermuluk-muluk.
Mencapai suatu kompromi dalam pembentukan pemerintah hampir mustahil.
Itulah sebabnya penguatan upaya militer diperlukan untuk menjadikan daerah-daerah kantong lebih aman dan luas sehingga mampu melindungi penduduk sipil dan memerangi ISIS.
Suriah bukanlah negara yang hidup dalam kondisi layak dan normal, bahkan mungkin tidak akan bisa kembali ke kondisi normal.
Negara Suriah yang terdiri dari daerah-daerah kantong dan canton-canton adalah bentuk yang lebih realistis di masa mendatang.
Elemen lainnya yang sangat diperlukan dalam strategi efektif apapun harus meliputi bantuan tambahan atau memberi tekanan kepada Turki untuk mengambil lebih banyak tindakan demi membendung rekrutmen ISIS.
Turki, bersama dengan Yordania dan Lebanon, memerlukan bantuan finansial lebih besar sebab mereka memikul sebagian besar beban karena persoalan  pengungsi.
Pemimpin Arab dan Muslim dapat berperan dengan menyampaikan pesan untuk menantang visi ISIS dan mendelegitimasi perilaku mereka.
Aspek domestik dalam kebijakan juga diperlukan.
Keamanan dalam negeri dan penegakan hukum – meningkatkan perlindungan baik di wilayah perbatasan dan dalam negeri – harus disesuaikan dengan kenaikan tingkat ancaman.
Retail terrorists – individu atau kelompok melakukan serangan bersenjata ke kelompok rentan di masyarakat – sangat sulit diatasi.
Ancaman dan terjadinya beberapa serangan mengharuskan ketahanan sosial yang lebih kuat dan sedapat mungkin menyeimbangkan ulang antara privasi individu dan keamanan kolektif.
Kita juga perlu menerima fakta dan kenyataan yang ada.
Perjuangan melawan Negara Islam bukanlah perang konvensional.
Kita tidak bisa memberantas atau menghancurkannya dalam waktu dekat, sebab ISIS merupakan jaringan dan gagasan, serta suatu organisasi dan negara de facto yang mengendalikan wilayah dan sumber daya.
Memang, terorisme masih dan terus menjadi salah satu momok di era ini.
Meskipun demikian, kabar baiknya adalah ancaman yang diakibatkan ISIS ke Timur Tengah dan seluruh dunia dapat dikurangi secara signifikan melalui tindakan terpadu dan berkelanjutan.
Pembelajaran utama dari serangan di Paris adalah kita harus siap bertindak kapan pun dan dimanapun.
After Pax Americana?
NEW YORK – It has become popular to suggest that when the dust settles from the global financial crisis, it may become clear that the United States-led post-war world has come to an end.
If so, the global system that has secured peace, security, openness, and economic growth over the past six decades could be in grave danger.
Inspired by American leadership since World War II’s end, Europe, then Japan, then much of Asia and the world rose to new levels of prosperity; the world economy globalized upon the foundation of international institutions, norms, and standards; and foreign students educated in American universities returned home with new ideas about free markets, entrepreneurship, and democracy.
For much of the past 60 years, it would have been impossible to hold such a fundamental dialogue without US participation. Today, it is almost becoming a new global norm that neither the international committee nor the US is prepared for.
Despite talk about American decline, the world is not prepared for a post-American era.
As irksome as some of America’s actions have been, particularly over the past eight years, America remains the world’s most critical champion of the progressive values that have lifted hundreds of millions of people out of abject poverty and political repression.
If the US were to play a relatively smaller role in world affairs, and no other system was created to pick up the slack, these values could be at risk.
Although many states now hide behind an alleged universal principle of inviolable state sovereignty, for example, would the international community really want to go back to the old model where states did whatever they wanted to their citizens within the confines of their own borders?
Do countries around the world believe that they will be better off if the global trade system breaks down or international shipping lanes become less secure?
Are countries like China willing to step up and pay their fair share of dues to keep the UN running (China currently pays 2.1% of UN dues, compared to more than 25% for the US), or to capitalize revised international financial institutions or the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria in a meaningful way?
Unless other countries become more willing to step forward for the common good, a post-American world could quickly become a far more frightening environment than what it would replace.
To make its case for a continued global leadership role, America must, however, step up to the plate.  While the go-it-alone impulse of the Bush administration has been discredited by its consequences, the inverse lessons regarding how important collaborative action is in today’s interconnected world are still being learned.
Even at the apex of American power, America’s greatness was always based on inspiring others, and the opportunities for building market share in that particular category remain unlimited.
It is impossible to overestimate how significant a step Barack Obama’s election is in this direction, but America’s actions over the coming years will be the ultimate determinant of whether the power of America’s model can be restored.
America can and should, for example, become the global leader combating climate change through major investments in alternative energy, conservation, and energy efficiency, and by taking strong actions at home to reduce America’s greenhouse gas emissions.  It should transform its immigration policy to recruit the best and brightest people from around the world to move to the US and become citizens, and remain the world’s leading champion of open markets, especially during the current financial crisis.
Closing the prison at Guantánamo and reaffirming America’s commitment to international law and human rights will also be an important step in this direction.
The world wants to believe in an America that lives up to its own best values.
The prospect of a truly global community of nations working together to achieve the greater good for all is indeed exciting.
But, although America has been far from perfect over the last six decades, the end of the pax Americana has the potential to create a dangerous void in international affairs.
If the world is going to shift in the direction of a new and more globally democratic system, other nations will need to meaningfully step forward to assume new responsibilities.
It is in America’s and the world’s interest that they do so.  The evidence of this will be seen not only in global institutions but also in places like Darfur, Zimbabwe, and Burma.
Until this happens, let us all hope that America can get back on track as the global champion of collaborative action to address the world’s greatest challenges and work with as many other countries  as possible to move collectively in the right direction.
After the Guns of August
The Middle East is a place where the dust hardly ever settles.
When it occasionally does, even for a short interval – as UN Resolution 1701 for cessation of hostilities in Lebanon seems to be holding – it is time to take stock of events in the hopes that a responsible debate may influence those in power.
Let’s start with the United States.
President George W. Bush has been short on neither initiatives nor catchy slogans and acronyms.
Recent years are littered with them: “Global War on Terror” (GWOT), “Road Map,” “Middle East Partnership Initiative “ (MEPI), “Broader Middle East and North Africa” (BMENA) – originally “Greater Middle East Initiative (GMEI) – Democracy Assisted Dialogue (DAD), and so on.
His latest reverie, envisioned in the thick of the recent fighting between Israel and Hezbollah, was the New Middle East (NME), with US clients Israel, Egypt, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia serving as the pillars of regional order.
But like all his previous initiatives since the terrorist attacks on New York and Washington almost five years ago now, the NME ran into trouble from the outset.
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice announced its birth while rejecting an immediate ceasefire in Lebanon.
Her poor timing made the initiative appear heartless, as thousands of civilians were being uprooted, killed, or maimed by Israel’s efficient but ruthless artillery and air force.
This so embarrassed the three Arab NME partners that each raced to distance itself from the US-sponsored initiative.
Saudi Arabia, which had remained silent for nearly two weeks, did so with a $500 million contribution to rebuilding devastated areas of Lebanon and another billion to support Lebanon’s threatened currency.
Egypt’s heir apparent Gamal Mubarak followed suit in the fourth week of the fighting by heading a 70-member delegation on a solidarity visit to Beirut.
But, rather than earning him the respect of an outraged Egyptian public, revelations in the opposition press that his plane had to obtain a safe passage and authority to land from the Israelis garnered only howls of derision.
As for America, anything it touches in the Middle East has become radioactive, even for longstanding clients and friends.
In the course of maneuvering to delay the UN ceasefire, Bush and Rice continually reiterated the need for a Security Council resolution that deals forcefully with “the roots of the problem.”
Of course, for them and for Israel, this was Hezbollah and the need to eradicate or at a minimum disarm it and force its fighters to a safe distance from settlements and towns in northern Israel.
While this is a reasonable demand, the rest of the Middle East – and, indeed, much of the world, including Europe – regard the root cause of the conflict as Israeli intransigence and arrogance, together with America’s blind support for it.
Both America and Israel have cited foot-dragging in implementing UN Resolution 1559, which calls for disarming all non-state actors in Lebanon and the deployment of government forces all the way to the southern border.
But for years the US and Israel have not uttered a word about the dozens of UN resolutions, going back as far as Resolution 49 on partition in 1947, which called for the establishment of distinct Arab and Jewish states on roughly half of Mandated Palestine.
This and numerous other resolutions seeking redress for injustices toward Palestinians have been ignored by the US.
Thus, for 300 million Arabs and more than one billion Muslims the “root cause” of the Middle East conflict is not Hezbollah.
As its leader, Hassan Nasrallah aptly put it, “We are just a reaction to chronic injustice.”
It may well be that there is more than one root cause – every party to the conflict has a favorite one.
There is no point in belaboring whose pain is greater or whose root cause is deeper.
In fact, arguing over grievances merely drives the sides further apart.
The long overdue UN Resolution 1701 may, with its adoption, indicate that all parties are fatigued, or could no longer withstand international pressure.
This is good news for all concerned and provides an opportunity to tackle each party’s “root cause.”
Seizing the opportunity requires that humility rather than moral supremacy prevails.
Empathy, not ethnocentrism, should be the order of the day now that the guns are falling silent and we have rediscovered the limits of military force.
But if we have learned anything at all from the tragic assassinations of the region’s greatest peacemakers, Anwar Sadat and Yitzhak Rabin, it is that the guns do not remain silent for long.
During any lull, a fanatic from either side could jump to center stage and, through an act of utter madness, kick up the settling dust and dash the hopes of the many on both sides who still long for a lasting peace.
After the Millennium Development Goals
CAMBRIDGE – In 2000, 189 countries collectively adopted the United Nations Millennium Declaration, which evolved into a set of concrete targets called the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
These ambitious targets – ranging from halving extreme poverty and reducing maternal mortality by three-quarters to achieving universal primary schooling and halting (and beginning to reverse) the spread of HIV/AIDS – are supposed to be met by the end of 2015.
As the deadline approaches, development experts are debating a new question: What comes next?
It is virtually certain that many of the MDGs will not have been met by the end of 2015, but there have been striking successes in some areas.
For example, the goal of halving extreme poverty (measured by the number of people living on less than $1.25 a day) will likely be achieved ahead of time, largely thanks to China’s phenomenal growth.
At the same time, there is little evidence to suggest that those successes were the result of the MDGs themselves.
China implemented the policies that engineered history’s greatest poverty eradication program prior to, and independently from, the Millennium Declaration and the MDGs.
Clearly, however, the MDGs were a public-relations triumph, which is not to belittle their contribution.
Like all worthwhile PR efforts, the MDGs served to raise awareness, galvanize attention, and mobilize action – all for a good cause.
They amplified the global conversation about development and defined its terms.
And there is evidence that they got advanced countries to pay more attention to poor nations.
Indeed, the MDGs possibly had their clearest impact on aid flows from rich to poor countries.
A study by Charles Kenny and Andy Sumner for the Center for Global Development in Washington, DC, suggests that the MDGs not only boosted aid flows, but also redirected them toward smaller, poorer countries, and toward targeted areas like education and public health.
However, aid was not directly linked to performance and results, and it is much more difficult to know whether it had the desired impact overall.
The MDGs encompass eight goals, 21 targets, and 60 indicators.
Much criticism has focused on the use of these numerical targets and indicators, which, skeptics argue, are misspecified, mismeasured, and divert attention from equally important areas.
But these complaints miss the point.
Any effort that is concrete and implementable needs to monitor the results, and setting clear numerical targets is the best way to do so.
Still, a central paradox plagues the MDGs.
The Millennium Declaration was meant to be a compact between the world’s rich and poor countries.
Poor countries promised to refocus their development efforts while rich countries pledged to support them with finance, technology, and access to their markets.
But, oddly, of the eight goals, only the last one deals with “global partnership,” or what rich countries can and should do.
Even here, the MDGs contain no numerical target for financial aid or any other aspect of rich countries’ assistance, in contrast to the highly specific poverty-related targets set for developing countries.
It is perhaps telling that the “progress charts” prepared by the United Nations Development Program, the agency charged with reporting on progress toward achieving the MDGs, track only Internet usage under that goal.
Why we need a global effort to convince developing countries to do what is good for them is not clear.
Poverty reduction and human development should be the first order of business for governments in these countries, with or without the MDGs.
It is true, of course, that these governments often pursue different goals, for political, military, and other reasons.
But it is wishful thinking to believe that they can be persuaded to act otherwise by international declarations that lack enforcement mechanisms.
If we have learned one thing in the development business, it is that real reform cannot be bought with donors’ money, let alone with vague promises of money.
Equally problematic, the MDGs implicitly assume that we know how to achieve development targets, and that only resources and political will are missing.
But it is doubtful that even well-intentioned policymakers have a good handle on, say, how to raise secondary-school completion rates sustainably or reduce maternal mortality.
Many development economists would argue that significant improvements in governance and political institutions are required before such goals can be achieved.
The most that rich countries can do is to provide an enabling environment for the benefit of developing countries that are willing and able to take advantage of it.
These considerations suggest an obvious direction for the next iteration of the MDGs.
First, a new global compact should focus more directly on rich countries’ responsibilities.
Second, it should emphasize policies beyond aid and trade that have an equal, if not greater, impact on poor countries’ development prospects.
A short list of such policies would include: carbon taxes and other measures to ameliorate climate change; more work visas to allow larger temporary migration flows from poor countries; strict controls on arms sales to developing nations; reduced support for repressive regimes; and improved sharing of financial information to reduce money laundering and tax avoidance.
Notice that most of these measures are actually aimed at reducing damage – for example, climate change, military conflict, and financial crime – that otherwise results from rich countries’ conduct.
“Do no harm” is as good a principle here as it is in medicine.
This kind of reorientation will not be easy.
Advanced countries are certain to resist any new commitments.
But most of these measures do not cost money, and, as the MDGs have shown, setting targets can be used to mobilize action from rich-country governments.
If the international community is going to invest in a bold new public-relations initiative, it might as well focus on areas where the potential payoffs are the greatest.
After the Promised Land
LONDON – At the height of the Arab uprisings last spring, many Europeans were gripped by nightmare visions of a tsunami of migrants crashing against the continent’s shores.
The wave never hit, but its specter fed a tenacious anti-immigrant populism that has concealed an important new trend: migration to Europe – and to the United States – has largely stalled.
In many countries, more immigrants are leaving than are arriving, owing mainly to the economic crisis that has drained jobs in the West.
That reversal is one of the great under-reported stories of 2011 (and of the preceding two years), and the numbers are startling.
Consider Spain, which is on track to lose more than a half-million residents by 2020.
By contrast, between 2002 and 2008, Spain’s population grew by 700,000 a year, driven largely by immigration.
The trends are similar elsewhere in Europe.
While this fact alone will not quiet opponents of immigration, it does give countries more breathing room to repair and strengthen badly broken systems for receiving and integrating newcomers.
Although rapidly aging Western countries are unable to attract the immigrants they need, they allow millions who are already there to suffer discrimination and abuse.
Detentions and deportations take place under sometimes terrible conditions.
Meanwhile, the international community collectively fails to protect vast populations of vulnerable migrants, such as the millions stranded by the recent conflicts in North Africa.
Undoubtedly, rising anti-immigrant populism must be confronted.
While polling suggests that attitudes are influenced more by ethnicity than religion, both help to define identities and mindsets.
Political parties in France, Switzerland, and the Netherlands (to name a few) have run successful campaigns that scapegoat immigrants.
Moreover, governments from Alabama to Hungary are passing laws that undermine what should be migrants’ rights.
Italy recently adopted harsh “emergency” decrees that target migrants by making undocumented entry and residence a criminal offense.
Anti-immigrant rhetoric from the political extremes has fed into mainstream political discourse.
European leaders trip over themselves to declare, one more forcefully than the next, that multiculturalism is dead.
Dutch politician Geert Wilders, whose Freedom Party is informally part of the governing coalition, did them one better by being charged with incitement to anti-Muslim hatred.
In the US, alligator-filled moats and electrified border fences have featured in the current presidential campaign.
Such attacks on immigration might offer some instant political gratification, but their net result is to cleave societies whose cohesion is already seriously challenged by the economic crisis.
Growing discrimination in employment, housing, and education affects not just immigrants and their children; it harms our societies as a whole.
With the lull in net immigration, we now have a window of opportunity to address these shortcomings.
Debunking the myths about migration – that most immigrants enter unlawfully, for example, or that immigration displaces existing workers – would be a good place to start.
It would also be useful to explain that immigration is necessary for prosperity and growth in almost all OECD countries.
If aging societies in the West and elsewhere (like Japan) fail to get immigration right, they will be woefully unprepared when they confront the real tidal wave: the retirement of baby boomers in the coming two decades.
The gaps in these countries’ labor markets – from software specialists to physicians to home health aides – will be immense.
The European Union’s labor force will decline by almost 70 million workers in the next 40 years; in the absence of significant net immigration (combined with a much higher retirement age), European economies and social safety nets will shrivel.
The priorities are clear.
We need to understand better how our economies will evolve in the coming decades, and to redesign our educational systems to produce workers with usable skills.
And, where it is clear that immigrants will be needed, we must be able to identify, welcome, integrate, and protect them.
Meanwhile, our most fundamental institutions – schools, police, and the courts – must be re-engineered to reflect and respond to the diversity of our communities, which is now a fact of life.
Countries must learn to work together to achieve these goals, few of which can be reached by going it alone.
If our toolbox were empty, our inaction might be understandable.
But examples of smart migration practices abound.
Canada and the Philippines, for instance, have a well-functioning accord that protects the rights of temporary workers.
Sweden has developed legislation that minimizes bureaucracy for companies that need foreign workers.
And important advances have been made in ensuring that immigrant children receive the education that they need to become full members of society.
Progress is being made on the global level as well, despite the economic crisis and populist headwinds.
In June, the International Labor Organization’s member states overwhelmingly approved the Domestic Workers Convention, which will significantly increase protections for a vulnerable group of workers –&nbsp;the majority of whom are migrants.
Meanwhile, the Global Forum on Migration and Development, established in 2007, has quickly become an important means of fostering knowledge and partnerships.
The reason for growing international cooperation is simple: countries everywhere are affected by migration, and, increasingly, they are experiencing immigration and emigration simultaneously.
Indeed, roughly one-third of migrants nowadays move between developed countries; one-third move between developing countries; and only one-third move from the developing to the developed world.
Highly skilled workers, such as bankers and engineers, are flocking to China.
Mexico, known primarily as a country of emigration, is home to millions of migrants from Central America.
Millions of people in Southeast Asia venture to the Middle East to work, but millions more cross borders within the region.
The list goes on.
When it comes to migration, we are all in the same boat – and that boat is leaking.
Starting in 2012, countries should redouble their efforts to fix it.
A Future without Precedent
JERUSALEM – In my nearly nine decades of life, I cannot recall a time in which the past was so irrelevant to policymaking.
All of today’s significant developments went unpredicted by anyone.
Experts studied the past, but, constrained by old paradigms, they could not discern the future.
Today’s dynamic complexity, in which a science-based, fast-changing global economy makes so many more phenomena interdependent, prevents us from foreseeing the future through linear extrapolations of the past.
The only certainty is that the future will be defined by scientific progress and innovation, which cannot be known ahead of time.
As a result, the traditional power of states and leaders is declining; in today’s global economy, innovators, not politicians, wield the most influence.
The globalized economy affects every state, yet no single state can determine the outcomes, because science and technology are borderless.
Global companies wish to do business worldwide, eroding not just sovereignty, but also racism and prejudice, as well as significantly weakening nationalism.
This transformation has placed the world in the hands of a younger generation, more technologically savvy than their parents and connected to one another through social networks that are not confined by territory, language, or government.
The young leaders who created Facebook and Google have had a greater global impact than many statesmen and generals.
These young people are also the leaders of erupting political protest movements.
The “Arab Spring,” the tent demonstrations in Israel, Occupy Wall Street, and the protests in Russia reveal not a clash of civilizations, but a battle of generations.
The young generation understands that the way states and economies are currently run is unfit for the new era.
Yet there are political “hitchhikers” who want to exploit the recent awakening, not by promoting an agenda of freedom, but by imposing a different type of coercion.
In the Arab world, it is mainly extreme Islamists who are hijacking the young generation’s wave, stealing their revolution.
Israel has reacted positively to the will of the young generation, but it cannot and should not intervene in events in the Arab world.
Our hearts are with the rebelling youngsters and their legitimate yearning for freedom and basic rights to express themselves, choose their leaders, and earn their own living.
Israelis wait for the day when our country will no longer be the region’s only democracy, because being an island of prosperity in a sea of poverty is unnatural.
Yet there is a real concern that the extremists, who are politically well organized, are seeking to gain control by the ballot over less-organized liberals, thus preventing peace and stability.
Fundamentalist radicals cannot provide real solutions to the region’s basic problems.
The social changes now underway threaten their way of life, which includes discrimination against women and a ban on modern education.
But only profound reforms of traditional authority can pave the way towards freedom and growth.
Israel can serve as an example to others striving to reach economic prosperity and social freedom, because its success is due to the fact that the country had absolutely nothing at the start.
We returned to our homeland, rich with history, but devoid of natural resources.
Israel was left with only one resource: its human capital.
So we invested in education and science, and today we have the world’s highest percentage of scientists and patents per capita.
Roughly 95% of our agriculture is hi-tech.
We use less water and yield more crops per acre than any other country in the world.
What Israel can do, others can do as well.
We will gladly offer a helping hand to whoever is willing to reach for it.
Together, in peace with our neighbors, we can create a region of hope, development, and success.
In particular, we must do everything in our power to end the conflict with the Palestinians.
Israel was not born, and it is not Israel’s destiny, to govern another people.
We are sincerely interested in the establishment of a Palestinian state living peacefully side-by-side with Israel, the democratic state of the Jewish people.
For us, peace is both a moral imperative and a national-security strategy, because resolving the conflict would help to stabilize the region by neutralizing the extremists who seek to manipulate today’s popular movements to advance their radical agenda.
The international community can support these efforts by providing incentives to countries that choose freedom and progress.
At the same time, determined and decisive policies must be taken against extremists.
In particular, Iran is a fount of moral corruption that spearheads extremism and halts reform, crushing the legitimate protest of its own citizens and acting against the brave Syrians now fighting for their freedom.
Iran also uses proxies to instigate terror against moderate forces in the Palestinian Authority, Lebanon, and Iraq.
If Iran is successful in its plan to acquire nuclear weapons, its leaders could shake the Middle East and encourage more extremism and violence.
Israel will defend itself if Iran continues to call for its destruction.
However, the threat is not to Israel alone; Iran is a danger to the peace and stability of the entire world.
The world’s democracies have declared that they will not allow Iran to possess nuclear arms; it is their duty to follow through on that commitment, before doing so becomes impossible.
Beyond the short-term challenges ahead, we all have a duty to profoundly change the way we prepare our children to cope with today’s new world.
In an era where yesterday has become almost irrelevant and we can hardly predict tomorrow, the role of education must allow all children to reach their highest potential.
Today’s educators should inspire our children towards creativity and innovation.
Self-expression is as important as free expression.
I write this in the 88th year of my life, but not because I have learned from experience.
On the contrary, experience is overrated, often constraining the courage needed to face tomorrow and build an unprecedented new world.
The future is already here; there is no point in looking back.
Against Simplification
NEW YORK – It is said that Americans have a genius for simplification.
Gradually, however, the quest for it has become a global trend, one that continues to conquer new territories, just as blue jeans once did.
The speed of our daily life is visibly increased – and not for the better – by this unstoppable evolution.
The tyranny of pragmatism seems to mark all of the complex dilemmas of our time.
Too many valid choices are ignored or skirted through the routine of short-cuts.
Nowhere is this trend more damaging than in today’s mercantile approach to art.
Even the much-praised notion of competition seems fake and cynically manipulated by the “corporate” mentality that now pervades the world of culture – by the financial pre-selection that determines what publishers, producers, and other impresarios will support.
Just imagine what might have happened with the works of, say, Proust, Kafka, Musil, Faulkner, or Borges had they been subjected to mass-market competition like shoes or cosmetics.
Culture is a necessary pause from the daily rat race, from our chaotic and often vulgar political surroundings, and it is a chance to recover our spiritual energy.
Great books, music, and paintings are not only an extraordinary school of beauty, truth, and good, but also a way of discovering our own beauty, truth, and good – the potential for change, of bettering ourselves and even some of our interlocutors.
If this respite and refuge is gradually narrowed and invaded by the same kind of “products” as those that dominate the mass market, we are condemned to be perpetual captives of the same stunted universe of “practicalities,” the ordinary agglomeration of clichés packaged in advertisements.
I was thinking again about these old and seemingly unsolvable questions during my re-reading of a quite challenging novel by a close friend and a great writer, not very present in the vivid landscape of American letters of today.
The theme, style, and echo of his work says a lot, I think, about our simplified world.
The novel is Blinding, by Claudio Magris.
Hailed in Europe as one of the great novels of the twentieth century, Blinding arrived in America only after a great delay, and never received the attention that it deserved.
Unfortunately, that is no surprise.
The number of literary translations done nowadays in the United States is, according to a United Nations report, equal to that of Greece, a country one-tenth the size.
Imported books are thought to be too “complicated,” which is another way of saying that literature should deal with simple issues in a simple way, obeying the rules of the mass market, with its tricks of packaging, accessibility, advertisement, and comfort.
At the core of Magris’ book is the destiny of a group of Italian communists who travel to Yugoslavia after the Second World War to contribute to the construction of a socialist society, only to be caught in the conflict between Stalin and Tito.
They are imprisoned for their Stalinist allegiance; when they are finally allowed to return to Italy, their old comrades refuse to accept them.
The book’s plot spans two centuries of revolution.
Then, suddenly,
“the party vanished, overnight, as if all of a sudden a giant sponge had drained the entire sea, Adriatic and Austral, leaving litter and clots of mud, and all the boats stranded.
How can you go home again if the sea has been sucked down a vast drain that opened up beneath it, emptying it who knows where, into a void?
The earth is arid and dead, but there won’t be another one, nor another heaven.”
The solitude of the individual facing his faith alone, without collective illusions, and forced to do something with himself in the arid, noisy world tells us something important about the exiled world of modernity and its complex and contradictory problems.
Magris’s novel is not only an important literary achievement; it also has a deep connection to the dangers that we face now, particularly the wave of fanaticism, from Mumbai to Oslo, in the name of a holy war against the “other.”
Are all the extremists searching for a new coherence, for a lost illusion of togetherness and a new hope of resurrection?
Can we ever forget September 11, 2001, the start of a bloody century in which the mystical force of hatred and destruction has recovered its strength?
Are Osama Bin Laden’s minions, the bloody Hamas-Hezbollah battalions, or troubled loners like Timothy McVeigh, Theodore Kaczynski, and now Norway’s Anders Behring Breivik, the “heroes” of our contemporary nightmare?
Is this the “rebel” response to an overly globalized, incoherent, and ultimately disturbing reality?
If so, their barbarism demands scrutiny – in relation to both historical precedent and to our modernity – rather than merely being labeled “monstrous” (though it certainly is that).
It is also a rich and original literary achievement that challenges today’s consumerist ethic.
By renouncing simplicity, it also repudiates today’s prevailing confusion of information with literature, of facts with creativity, and best-selling products with true works of art.
The Age of Hyper-Uncertainty
BERLIN – The year 2017 will mark the 40th anniversary of the publication of John Kenneth Galbraith’s The Age of Uncertainty.
Forty years is a long time, but it is worth looking back and reminding ourselves of how much Galbraith and his readers had to be uncertain about.
In 1977, as Galbraith was writing, the world was still reeling from the effects of the first OPEC oil-price shock and wondering whether another one was in the pipeline (as it were).
The United States was confronting slowing growth and accelerating inflation, or stagflation, a novel problem that raised questions about policymakers’ competence and the adequacy of their economic models.
Meanwhile, efforts to rebuild the Bretton Woods international monetary system had collapsed, casting a shadow over prospects for international trade and global economic growth.
For all these reasons, the golden age of stability and predictability that was the third quarter of the twentieth century seemed to have abruptly drawn to a close, to be succeeded by a period of greatly heightened uncertainty.
That’s how things looked in 1977, anyway.
Viewed from the perspective of 2017, however, the uncertainty of 1977 seems almost enviable.
In 1977, there was no President Donald Trump.
Jimmy Carter may not go down in history as one of the best US presidents, but he did not threaten actions that placed the entire global system at risk.
He did not turn his back on America’s international commitments such as NATO and the World Trade Organization.
Nor did Carter go to war with the Federal Reserve or pack its board with sympathetic appointees willing to sacrifice sound money to his reelection prospects.
On the contrary, he appointed Paul Volcker, a towering pillar of monetary stability, as chairman of the Board of Governors.
And although Carter did not succeed in balancing the federal budget, he didn’t blow it up, either.
Whether Trump slaps a tariff on Chinese goods, repudiates the North American Free Trade Agreement, packs the Federal Reserve Board, or undermines fiscal sustainability remains to be seen.
Conceivable outcomes range from mildly reassuring to utterly catastrophic.
Who knows what will happen?
By today’s standards, Carter was the embodiment of predictability.
In 1977, moreover, the prospects for European integration were rosy.
Denmark, Ireland, and, most notably, the United Kingdom had recently joined a rapidly growing European Community.
The EC was attracting members, not losing them.
It was a club that countries sought to join precisely in order to achieve faster economic growth.
Moreover, to buttress its common market, the EC had just established a regional monetary system, the suggestively named “snake in the tunnel.”
While this was far from a perfect monetary system, it had one very positive attribute: countries could leave in hard economic times, and rejoin if and when the outlook brightened.
In 2017, in contrast, negotiations over Brexit will continue to cast a dark cloud of uncertainty over the European Union.
How those negotiations will proceed and how long they will take are anyone’s guess.
Moreover, the main questions raised by Britain’s decision to leave – whether other countries will follow and, indeed, whether the EU itself has a future – remain far from resolved.
China, still largely cut off from the world, did not figure in this discussion.
And even if something went wrong in the Third World, developing countries were simply too small to drag down the global economy.
The situation today couldn’t be more different.
What happens in China, Brazil, or Turkey doesn’t stay in China, Brazil, or Turkey.
On the contrary, developments in these countries have first-order implications for the world economy, given how emerging markets have accounted for the majority of global growth in recent years.
China has an unmanageable corporate-debt problem and a government whose commitment to restructuring the economy is uncertain.
Turkey has a massive current-account deficit, an erratic president, and an unstable geopolitical neighborhood.
And if political scandals were export goods, Brazil would have a clear comparative advantage.
Although The Age of Uncertainty was about much more than the year 1977, it captured the tenor of the times.
But if Galbraith were writing the same book in 2017, he probably would call the 1970s The Age of Assurance.
A German Europe?
LISBON/RIGA – Is the Europe that is emerging from the euro crisis a German one?
During the euro crisis, power in the European Union seems to have shifted towards national capitals in general, and towards one national capital in particular: Berlin.
But, with Germany introverted, France downgraded, and Britain semi-detached, the big story in European foreign policy is that the time has come for the little guy who thinks big.
In this Europe, the important moves are now sometimes made in Stockholm or Warsaw, not only in Berlin, Paris, or London.
And, with major foreign-policy issues on Europe’s doorstep – whether in Egypt, Belarus, or now Syria – useful European initiatives are to be welcomed, regardless of where they originate.
Germany, in foreign policy as well as in economics, can exert decisive leadership in the EU – when it wants to.
For example, together with Poland, it led the EU’s attempt to develop a coordinated approach to Russia, and it flexed its muscles on Serbia.
But, on other issues – for example, Libya – Germany did not so much lead as use its newfound room for maneuver to follow its own preferences in the face of other EU members.
So the answer today to Henry Kissinger’s famous question about whom he should call when he wants to speak to Europe, is not necessarily “the German chancellor.”
While Berlin is increasingly imposing its economic preferences on others in the eurozone, it is not prepared to use military force as a foreign-policy tool, as it demonstrated in the case of Libya.
Moreover, Germany, it seems, is becoming a “geo-economic power” driven by the needs of its export sector.
By using economic means to pursue its foreign-policy ends, Germany is gradually turning its back on its European partners.
Meanwhile, as France experiences a loss of power relative to Germany on economic issues, it continues to play a decisive role in foreign policy.
France led the Libya operation, and is doing much the same with attempts to impose stronger sanctions against Iran and provide support for the United Nations in Côte d’Ivoire.
But France’s unilateral approach often antagonizes its European partners.
For example, French President Nicolas Sarkozy preempted a common European position on the Palestinian statehood bid at the UN in September.
In other words, even when France leads, it does not always do so in a constructive way.
Apart from the decisive role that it played in Libya alongside France, Britain is becoming increasingly marginal in European foreign policymaking.
Even before it vetoed a plan by eurozone countries to create a “fiscal union” at the European summit in December 2011, it was playing less of a leadership role than it traditionally has on key European foreign-policy issues.
Britain has continued to support EU enlargement, closer links with Turkey, and development in Africa, but it has not launched any creative initiatives to bring other member states along or change the terms of the EU debate.
On other issues, such as engaging “strategic partners” – China and Russia in particular – the United Kingdom is often a follower as well.
As the “big three” increasingly pursue their own narrowly defined national interests, however, other EU member states are emerging as leaders in key foreign-policy fields.
For example, Sweden – the 14th largest member state in terms of population, and eighth in terms of GDP – under the leadership of Prime Minister Fredrik Reinfeldt and Foreign Minister Carl Bildt punches considerably above its weight.
Last year, it increased annual aid to North Africa by SEK100 million (€11.1 million), proposed an EU mission to Tunisia just a week after the revolution to support democratic aspirations there, and was an early and strong backer of UN resolutions in support of the uprising in Libya.
Poland, too, is emerging as a foreign-policy leader.
Prime Minister Donald Tusk and Foreign Minister Radek Sikorski have particularly taken the initiative on the EU’s strategy towards Russia, where Poland has largely overcome its differences with Germany and is now at the forefront of efforts to develop a genuinely comprehensive approach.
Poland has also led on European defense (though it declined to take part in the military intervention in Libya).
This reflects the strength of the Polish economy, which is expected to grow by more than 3% in 2012 – faster than almost anywhere else in the EU.
Germany might be getting all of the attention in this time of crisis, but the last year has been a reminder that Europe is most effective and influential when the small countries get involved and join forces with – and even lead – the big ones.
For example, on Iran (with exceptions like Greece), Europeans have united around a clear policy and collective positions, such as an oil embargo.
So, Poland and Sweden:&nbsp; Europe needs your leadership.
But that might not be enough in an EU with more than 500 million citizens.
Other EU states need to follow their example in order to make European foreign policy truly effective and influential.
A German Glimmer in a Global Boom
But the boom is not uniform.
In the United States, the number of experts giving a favorable assessment of the current situation declined; indeed, a majority believes that the economic situation will worsen during the next six months.
However, in the Asian countries, including China, the optimism is unbroken.
The same is true for Eastern Europe, the ex-Soviet states, and Latin America.
In general, the big EU countries are still performing badly, in contrast to the smaller members – hardly surprising, given that the EU is basically an institution to help the smaller countries overcome the drawback of their size by extending the agglomeration advantages that formerly were reserved to the bigger countries.

But even Germany, Europe’s biggest economy, is experiencing an upswing.
The Ifo climate indicator for Germany, based on monthly surveys of 7,000 firms, jumped upwards in the second half of 2005, reaching its highest value since the boom year 2000, with businesses’ assessment of the current situation and expectations improving.
After five years of stagnation, the economy is finally on the move.
While the second half of 2005 was already quite good, Ifo expects investment in equipment to grow by a healthy 6% in 2006.
After many years of contraction, investment in construction also will rise slightly.
Total investment growth is expected to reach 2.9% – weak by past standards, but nonetheless a promising salve for the wounded German mood.
But everything is relative: Germany’s trend growth rate is just 1.1%, and the country has been the slowest growing EU country since 1995.
Measured against a disappointing past, even Germany is currently experiencing an economic boom.
Indeed, even German unemployment, which has been rising in cycles since 1970, will decline slightly in 2006, from 4.8 to 4.7 million.
The good economic data will reinforce initial favorable impressions of Angela Merkel’s new government, which got off to an excellent start at the EU Summit, where Merkel helped to broker a compromise between Britain and France on the Union’s 2007-2013 budget (by adding another €2 billion to Germany’s annual contribution).
In fact, the government may even have contributed a bit to the good economic data by announcing a serious effort to consolidate Germany’s own public finances – a prerequisite for investor confidence.
According to the government, substantial tax increases will bring the fiscal deficit below the 3%-of-GDP limit set by the Stability and Growth Pact – a target missed for five consecutive years – by 2007.
The real test for the German government is the labor market.
Most observers now agree that Germany needs something like the American earned-income tax credit.
In Germany, it’s called “activating social aid” or “combi wages,” but the principle is the same: the state should reduce the money it pays for doing nothing and pay more for participating in the work force.
That would widen the wage distribution, create jobs, and maintain the living standard of the poor.
Merkel announced in her inaugural speech in the Bundestag that her government will introduce such a system in 2006.
If this is more than lip service, and if she really carries out a serious reform of the German welfare state’s incentive structure, the result could be higher employment and structural economic growth.
In the long term, that would be more promising for the EU – and for the global economy – than the demand-driven performance that Germany is currently enjoying.
A Global Agenda for Seven Billion
NEW YORK – Late next month, a child will be born – the 7th billion citizen of planet Earth. We will never know the circumstances into which he or she was born.
We do know that the baby will enter a world of vast and unpredictable change – environmental, economic, geopolitical, technological, and demographic.
The world’s population has tripled since the United Nations was created in 1945.
To help create this future, I am focusing my second term as Secretary-General on five global imperatives – five generational opportunities to shape the world of tomorrow by the decisions we make today.
Prevention as a framework for international cooperation is a second opportunity.
This year, the UN peacekeeping budget will total $8 billion. Think of what we could save by avoiding conflicts – by deploying political mediation missions, for example, rather than troops.
We know how to do this.
Our record proves it – in Guinea, Kenya, and Kyrgyzstan.
A third imperative is building a safer and more secure world. In this effort, we must be courageous in standing up for democracy, human rights, and peace.
This year was one of signature achievements in restoring and securing peace – in Côte d’Ivoire, Darfur, Egypt, and elsewhere. But hatred and bloodshed still stand in the way of our vision for peace.  
In the Middle East, we must break the stalemate.
Palestinians deserve a state.
Israel needs security.
Both want peace. A negotiated settlement can produce these outcomes, and the UN is a platform for forging such a peace.
So, too, will we continue our efforts to foster democratic governance in Iraq, Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of Congo, and Sierra Leone. And, in the name of all of humanity, we will continue to push forward on nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, in service of realizing a world free of nuclear weapons.
The fourth big opportunity is supporting countries in transition.
This year’s dramatic events in North Africa and the Middle East inspired people around the globe.
Let us help make the Arab Spring a true season of hope for all.
In Libya, we are deploying a new UN support mission to assist the country’s transitional authorities in establishing a new government and legal order, consistent with the aspirations of the Libyan people.
Syria is a special concern.
For six months we have seen escalating violence and repression.
The government has repeatedly pledged to undertake reforms and listen to its people. It has not done so.
The moment to act is now.
The violence must stop.
Last but not least is the imperative of working with and for women and young people.  
Women hold up more than half the sky and represent much of the world’s unrealized potential.
We need their full engagement – in government, business, and civil society.
The UN has placed a high priority on promoting women at all levels of the Organization and this year, for the first time, UN Women is operating to promote the interests and rights of women all over the world.
Seven billion people now look toward the United Nations for solutions to the world’s great global challenges.
They hold different religions and backgrounds but common dreams and aspirations.
Our global future depends on bringing these individual talents and universal rights together in common cause.
Let our common agenda begin.
A Global Consensus Against Terrorism
Mention the United Nations and the first reaction is likely to be the ongoing oil-for-food scandal and what it will mean for Secretary-General Kofi Annan’s ability to lead the organization for the remaining year and a half of his tenure.
But there is much more going on at the UN than investigations.
Reform is in the air – in part because of the scandal, but also because of the UN’s inability to deal effectively with challenges ranging from Rwanda and Kosovo to Iraq and, most recently, Sudan.
Even the UN’s most ardent supporters now recognize that change is called for if the organization is to make a significant contribution to international peace and security.
Some of the reform talk concerns the UN Security Council’s composition.
The Security Council represents what the World War II Allies believed the post-war world would look like and how it should be run.
This helps to explain why a much-weakened France was made a permanent member of the Council – and why Germany and Japan (and a not-yet independent India) were not.
Defending the Security Council’s current make-up is impossible; the need for change is beyond debate.
In the meantime, there is important work to be done. One productive avenue would be to follow up on one of the recommendations of the High Level Panel that was endorsed by Annan; namely, that all UN members go on record declaring that terrorism has no place in today’s world.
This will prove more difficult than it first sounds.
For too long, the international community has tolerated terrorism – the intentional killing of civilians and noncombatants by non-state actors for political purposes – on the grounds that, on occasion, “one man’s terrorist is another man’s freedom fighter.”
Historians have the luxury of debating whether terrorism may have been justified in certain situations in the past.
We do not.
Modern terrorism is too destructive to be tolerated, much less supported.
Weapons of mass destruction – nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons – are just that, and no cause can excuse their use.
Moreover, as the terrorist attacks on America of 2001 showed, weapons as basic as box-cutters can become weapons of mass destruction if they are used to exploit the vulnerabilities of modern, global life.
Terrorism is even less justified given that political avenues exist nowadays for pursuing political aims.
Palestinians can negotiate their future relationship with Israel and can count on American, Russian, European, and UN assistance.
Iraqis have elected their own representatives and are poised to write their constitution.
No one pursuing reasonable goals and who is prepared to compromise can argue that terrorism is his or his group’s only option.
The world has already taken some important steps against terrorism.
A dozen international conventions and numerous UN resolutions commit governments to oppose hostage taking, the hijacking of civilian aircraft, and terrorism more broadly.
Similarly, the mandate of the Financial Action Task Force, created in 1989 to curb money laundering, has grown and become focused mainly on curbing terrorist financing.
UN Security Council Resolution 1373, passed after the September 11 attacks, calls on states to deny safe haven to terrorists, bring to justice anyone associated with terrorism, suppress recruitment by terrorist groups, block terrorists’ efforts to acquire weapons, and cooperate with other governments and international organizations in tracking suspects and boosting security.
What is missing is a new, 13th convention that closes the loophole that seems to permit governments to decide what constitutes terrorism and what does not.
Broad agreement is needed that any intentional killing of civilians and noncombatants is unacceptable, and that its perpetrators and supporters must be punished.
Of course, such a convention will not prevent all future acts of terrorism.
But ideas matter.
Terrorism needs to be de-legitimized in the way that slavery has been.
Doing so will make governments and individuals think twice before becoming a party to terrorism; it should also make it less difficult to garner support for international action against those who nevertheless carry it out.
We are taught early on in our lives that the end cannot justify the means.
It is time to put this principle into effect before many more innocent lives are lost.
A Global Green New Deal
NAIROBI – With unemployment soaring, bankruptcies climbing, and stock markets in free-fall, it may at first glance seem sensible to ditch the fight against climate change and put environmental investments on hold.
Such investments could generate an estimated five million “green-collar” jobs, provide a shot in the arm for the construction and engineering industries, and get America back into the equally serious business of combating climate change and achieving energy security.
The Republic of Korea, which is losing jobs for the first time in more than five years, has also spotted the green lining to grim economic times.
President Lee Myung-Bak’s government plans to invest $38 billion employing people to clean up four major rivers and reduce disaster risks by building embankments and water-treatment facilities.
Other elements of Lee’s plan include construction of eco-friendly transportation networks, such as high-speed railways and hundreds of kilometers of bicycle tracks, and generating energy using waste methane from landfills.
The package also counts on investments in hybrid vehicle technologies.
As a result, an estimated 500 megawatts of electricity, equal to 2% of the country’s electricity needs, will be generated, along with more than 5,000 jobs.
So it is clear that some countries now view environmental investments in infrastructure, energy systems, and ecosystems as among the best bets for recovery.
Others may be unsure about the potential returns from investing in ecosystem services such as forest carbon storage or in renewable energy for the 80% of Africans who have no access to electricity.
Still others may simply be unaware of how to precisely follow suit.
In early February, the United Nations Environment Program will convene some of the world’s leading economists at the UN’s headquarters in New York.
A strategy for a Global Green New Deal, tailored to different national challenges, will be fleshed out in order to assist world leaders and ministers craft stimulus packages that work on multiple fronts.
The Global Green New Deal, which UNEP launched as a concept in October 2008, responds to the current economic malaise.
Spent wisely, however, these stimulus packages could trigger far-reaching and transformational trends, setting the stage for a more sustainable, urgently needed Green Economy for the twenty-first century.
The trillions of dollars that have been mobilized to address current woes, together with the trillions of investors’ dollars waiting in the wings, represent an opportunity that was unthinkable only 12 months ago: the chance to steer a more resource-efficient and intelligent course that can address problems ranging from climate change and natural-resource scarcity to water shortages and biodiversity loss.
Blindly pumping the current bail-out billions into old industries and exhausted economic models will be throwing good money after bad while mortgaging our children’s future.
Instead, political leaders must use these windfalls to invest in innovation, promote sustainable businesses, and encourage new patterns of decent, long-lasting employment.
A Global Growth Bargain
In this decade, the world will be transformed&nbsp;yet again by the rise of the Asian consumer.&nbsp;By 2020, Asia’s domestic markets will be twice the size of America’s.
The world’s middle class will have swelled from one billion consumers to three billion.
The opportunities for growth in Europe and the US from this additional global demand are enormous.
The countries and companies that will flourish in Asia’s new markets will be those that can provide the technology-driven, custom-built, high value-added goods and services needed to serve Asia’s two billion consumers.
But neither Europe nor the US is in a strong enough position to take best advantage of these new markets.
The West must again begin to out-invent, out-innovate, and out-skill the rest of the world if it is to seize the opportunities that Asia presents.&nbsp;Indeed, unless the West significantly expands its capital investment in engineering, science, and new technologies, it will be marginalized by countries whose governments back their innovators with hard cash.
Obama’s investment plan could be the foundation stone for a formal global agreement that delivers higher levels of growth to all corners of the world and creates millions of new jobs.
Under such an agreement, Europe would join the US in raising levels of investment – complementing America’s “moonshot”&nbsp;initiative with a program of structural reform aimed at building a digital, green, energy-efficient, and competitive economy – while China would play its part by increasing its consumption.
I believe that such an agreement could boost the world economy by around 3% by 2014 – and lift 100 million people out of poverty.
I presented this plan when I chaired the G-20 in London in 2009.
I wanted East and West to commit to a formal strategy to deliver more enduring results than those promised by the rescue packages that we were putting together at the time.
Our attention was focused on preventing recession from turning into depression.
I argued that this was also the moment to pioneer a more lasting framework of growth.
In the end, no agreement was possible on a shared growth objective, and there has not yet&nbsp;been enough political will for the coordinated action to achieve it.
Since then, Europe and America have grown well below their capacity (despite huge unmet demand throughout the world) and unemployment has climbed to around 10% on both continents (with youth unemployment reaching an alarming 20%).
The global growth agreement that evaded us in 2009 remains the unfinished work of the G-20.
Front-loaded public investment could be funded through an enhanced European Investment Bank.
China has already laid the foundation for playing its part: its policy of xiaokang (reducing poverty and expanding the middle class) should create a market for billions of dollars of&nbsp;Western goods and services.
The West should propose that if China’s consumption increases by 2-4 percentage points of its GDP over the next three years (entirely possible as it improves its social safety net, cuts taxes, and puts homeownership within reach of ordinary citizens), America and Europe will expand their public investment by similar amounts.
If other Asian countries do likewise, and agree to create a level playing field for exporters, we could create around 50 million additional jobs.
Of course, in the West, an investment plan invites criticism from those who prefer that we do nothing but talk about growth strategies.
Indeed, critics argue that raising public investment conflicts with the drive to reduce deficits, and warn of higher interest rates on the back of further spending.
But critics are wrong about the impact on the deficit&nbsp;of focused investment.
A recent study by the International Monetary Fund produced unequivocal evidence that we can actually maintain deficit-reduction plans while benefiting from the additional capital investment that the US and European economies need.
The West is well placed to play its part in global renewal.
Its extraordinary workforces produce world-class goods and services.
But the West’s workforce must not be condemned to policies that willfully produce a decade of slow growth and low employment.
That would be a human tragedy, not just an economic disaster.
A Global Perfect Storm
NEW YORK – Dark, lowering financial and economic clouds are, it seems, rolling in from every direction: the eurozone, the United States, China, and elsewhere.
Indeed, the global economy in 2013 could be a very difficult environment in which to find shelter.
For starters, the eurozone crisis is worsening, as the euro remains too strong, front-loaded fiscal austerity deepens recession in many member countries, and a credit crunch in the periphery and high oil prices undermine prospects of recovery.
The eurozone banking system is becoming balkanized, as cross-border and interbank credit lines are cut off, and capital flight could turn into a full run on periphery banks if, as is likely, Greece stages a disorderly euro exit in the next few months.
Moreover, fiscal and sovereign-debt strains are becoming worse as interest-rate spreads for Spain and Italy have returned to their unsustainable peak levels.
Indeed, the eurozone may require not just an international bailout of banks (as recently in Spain), but also a full sovereign bailout at a time when eurozone and international firewalls are insufficient to the task of backstopping both Spain and Italy. As a result, disorderly breakup of the eurozone remains possible.
Farther to the west, US economic performance is weakening, with first-quarter growth a miserly 1.9% – well below potential.
And job creation faltered in April and May, so the US may reach stall speed by year end.
Worse, the risk of a double-dip recession next year is rising: even if what looks like a looming US fiscal cliff turns out to be only a smaller source of drag, the likely increase in some taxes and reduction of some transfer payments will reduce growth in disposable income and consumption.
Moreover, political gridlock over fiscal adjustment is likely to persist, regardless of whether Barack Obama or Mitt Romney wins November’s presidential election.
Thus, new fights on the debt ceiling, risks of a government shutdown, and rating downgrades could further depress consumer and business confidence, reducing spending and accelerating a flight to safety that would exacerbate the fall in stock markets.
In the east, China, its growth model unsustainable, could be underwater by 2013, as its investment bust continues and reforms intended to boost consumption are too little too late.
A new Chinese leadership must accelerate structural reforms to reduce national savings and increase consumption’s share of GDP; but divisions within the leadership about the pace of reform, together with the likelihood of a bumpy political transition, suggest that reform will occur at a pace that simply is not fast enough.
The economic slowdown in the US, the eurozone, and China already implies a massive drag on growth in other emerging markets, owing to their trade and financial links with the US and the European Union (that is, no “decoupling” has occurred).
At the same time, the lack of structural reforms in emerging markets, together with their move towards greater state capitalism, is hampering growth and will reduce their resiliency.
Finally, long-simmering tensions in the Middle East between Israel and the US on one side and Iran on the other on the issue of nuclear proliferation could reach a boil by 2013.
The current negotiations are likely to fail, and even tightened sanctions may not stop Iran from trying to build nuclear weapons.
With the US and Israel unwilling to accept containment of a nuclear Iran by deterrence, a military confrontation in 2013 would lead to a massive oil price spike and global recession.
These risks are already exacerbating the economic slowdown: equity markets are falling everywhere, leading to negative wealth effects on consumption and capital spending.
Borrowing costs are rising for highly indebted sovereigns, credit rationing is undermining small and medium-size companies, and falling commodity prices are reducing exporting countries’ income.
Increasing risk aversion is leading economic agents to adopt a wait-and-see stance that makes the slowdown partly self-fulfilling.
Compared to 2008-2009, when policymakers had ample space to act, monetary and fiscal authorities are running out of policy bullets (or, more cynically, policy rabbits to pull out of their hats).
Monetary policy is constrained by the proximity to zero interest rates and repeated rounds of quantitative easing.
Indeed, economies and markets no longer face liquidity problems, but rather credit and insolvency crises.
Meanwhile, unsustainable budget deficits and public debt in most advanced economies have severely limited the scope for further fiscal stimulus.
Using exchange rates to boost net exports is a zero-sum game at a time when private and public deleveraging is suppressing domestic demand in countries that are running current-account deficits and structural issues are having the same effect in surplus countries.
After all, a weaker currency and better trade balance in some countries necessarily implies a stronger currency and a weaker trade balance in others.
Meanwhile, the ability to backstop, ring-fence, and bail out banks and other financial institutions is constrained by politics and near-insolvent sovereigns’ inability to absorb additional losses from their banking systems.
As a result, sovereign risk is now becoming banking risk.
Indeed, sovereigns are dumping a larger fraction of their public debt onto banks’ balance sheet, especially in the eurozone.
To prevent a disorderly outcome in the eurozone, today’s fiscal austerity should be much more gradual, a growth compact should complement the EU’s new fiscal compact, and a fiscal union with debt mutualization (Eurobonds) should be implemented.&nbsp; In addition, a full banking union, starting with eurozone-wide deposit insurance, should be initiated, and moves toward greater political integration must be considered, even as Greece leaves the eurozone.
Unfortunately, Germany resists all of these key policy measures, as it is fixated on the credit risk to which its taxpayers would be exposed with greater economic, fiscal, and banking integration.
As a result, the probability of a eurozone disaster is rising.
And, while the cloud over the eurozone may be the largest to burst, it is not the only one threatening the global economy.
Batten down the hatches.
A Global Solutions Network
NEW YORK – Great social change occurs in several ways.
A technological breakthrough – the steam engine, computers, the Internet – may play a leading role.
Visionaries, such as Mahatma Gandhi, Martin Luther King Jr., and Nelson Mandela, may inspire a demand for justice.
Political leaders may lead a broad reform movement, as with Franklin Roosevelt and the New Deal.
Our own generation urgently needs to spur another era of great social change.
This time, we must act to save the planet from a human-induced environmental catastrophe.
Each of us senses this challenge almost daily.
Heat waves, droughts, floods, forest fires, retreating glaciers, polluted rivers, and extreme storms buffet the planet at a dramatically rising rate, owing to human activities.
Our $70-trillion-per-year global economy is putting unprecedented pressures on the natural environment.
We will need new technologies, behaviors, and ethics, supported by solid evidence, to reconcile further economic development with environmental sustainability.
United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon is taking on this unprecedented challenge from his unique position at the crossroads of global politics and society.
At the political level, the UN is the meeting place for 193 member states to negotiate and create international law, as in the important treaty on climate change adopted at the Rio Earth Summit in 1992.
At the level of global society, the UN represents the world’s citizenry, “we the peoples,” as it says in the UN Charter.&nbsp; At the societal level, the UN is about the rights and responsibilities of all of us, including future generations.
In the past two decades, governments have come up short on solutions to environmental threats.
Politicians have failed to implement properly the treaties adopted at the 1992 Earth Summit.
Ban knows that strong government action remains vital, but he also recognizes that civil society must also play a larger role, especially because too many governments and politicians are beholden to vested interests, and too few politicians think in time horizons that extend past the next election.
To empower global society to act, Ban has launched a bold new global initiative, for which I am grateful to volunteer.
The UN Sustainable Development Solutions Network is a powerful effort to mobilize global knowledge to save the planet.
The idea is to use global networks of knowledge and action to identify and demonstrate new, cutting-edge approaches to sustainable development around the world.
The network will work alongside and support governments, UN agencies, civil-society organizations, and the private sector.
Humanity needs to learn new ways to produce and use low-carbon energy, grow food sustainably, build livable cities, and manage the global commons of oceans, biodiversity, and the atmosphere.
But time is running very short.
Today’s mega-cities, for example, already have to confront dangerous heat waves, rising sea levels, more extreme storms, dire congestion, and air and water pollution.
Agricultural regions already need to become more resilient in the face of increased climate volatility.
And as one region in one part of the world designs a better way to manage its transport, energy needs, water supplies, or food supplies, those successes should quickly become part of the global knowledge base, enabling other regions to benefit rapidly as well.
Universities have a special role to play in the new UN knowledge network.
Exactly 150 years ago, in 1862, Abraham Lincoln created America’s “land-grant” universities to help local communities to improve farming and the quality of life through science.
Today, we need universities in all parts of the world to help their societies face the challenges of poverty reduction, clean energy, sustainable food supplies, and the rest.
By linking together, and putting their curricula online, the world’s universities can become even more effective in discovering and promoting science-based solutions to complex problems.
The world’s corporate sector also has a significant role to play in sustainable development.
Now the corporate sector has two faces.
It is the repository of cutting-edge sustainable technologies, pioneering research and development, world-class management, and leadership in environmental sustainability.
Yet at the same time, the corporate sector lobbies aggressively to gut environmental regulations, slash corporate-tax rates, and avoid their own responsibility for ecological destruction.
Sometimes the same company operates on both sides of the divide.
We urgently need far-sighted companies to join the Sustainable Development Solutions Network.
These companies are uniquely placed to move new ideas and technologies into early-stage demonstration projects, thereby accelerating global learning cycles.
Equally important, we need a critical mass of respected corporate leaders to press their peers to cease the anti-environmental lobbying and campaign-finance practices that account for the inaction of governments.&nbsp;
Sustainable development is a generational challenge, not a short-term task.
The reinvention of energy, food, transport, and other systems will take decades, not years.
But the long-term nature of this challenge must not lull us into inaction.
We must start reinventing our productive systems now, precisely because the path of change will be so long and the environmental dangers are already so pressing.&nbsp;
At the Rio+20 Summit this past June, the world’s governments agreed to adopt a new set of goals on sustainable development for the period after 2015, to build upon the Millennium Development Goals’ success in reducing poverty, hunger, and disease.
In the post-2015 era, the fight against poverty and the fight to protect the environment will go hand in hand, reinforcing each other.
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has already initiated several global processes to help establish the new post-2015 goals in an open, participatory, and knowledge-based way.&nbsp;
The Secretary General’s launch of the Sustainable Development Solutions Network is therefore especially timely.
Not only will the world adopt a new set of goals to achieve sustainable development, but it will also have a new global network of expertise to help achieve those vital objectives.&nbsp;
A Good Rate Hike for Europe
Two wrongs don’t make a right.
Just because European governments have failed to put bread on their constituents’ tables doesn’t mean that the European Central Bank should likewise fail in its job of promoting price stability in the euro zone.
That may sound obvious, but abandoning price stability is exactly what some European politicians are advocating.
For example, Italian politicians, who, given Italy’s recent dismal economic performance, would seem the least qualified to offer the ECB advice on monetary policy, are nonetheless advocating interest-rate cuts.
Echoing comments by Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, Deputy Economics Minister Mario Baldassarri said in Il Sole 24 Ore last week that all efforts to boost growth are in vain “if someone is pushing on the brake pedal.”
Who’s he kidding?
If anyone is “pushing down on the Italian growth brake” it is Berlusconi himself.
He has made no efforts at economic reform during his term and now seeks to blame the ECB for Italy’s lame economic performance.
But it is precisely the lack of economic reform at home that has made Italy one of the least competitive states in the euro-zone economy.
More than the usual “blame game” is at work here.
Pressures are mounting on the ECB to raise interest rates – and Berlusconi and Co.’s attacks are as much as an attempt to forestall future rate hikes as to get the ECB to loosen its monetary policy.
Soaring energy prices, for example, have become a leading inflation risk.
But higher energy prices, by themselves, will not cause the ECB to pull the interest-rate trigger.
The key will be so-called “second-round effects” – whether growing crude prices lead to higher wage demands from trade unions.
So far, the “social partners,” as ECB president Jean-Claude Trichet likes to call the unions, have been quiet.
Should this change, the ECB will have to raise rates even if Europe’s economic growth remains slack.
True, there is no inflation problem in the short run, but the ECB’s monetary policy focuses on the medium term.
One particular worry is that euro-zone money supply is well above the ECB’s benchmark level, indicating an excess supply of liquidity.
It is doubtful that the ECB would raise interest rates to curb excess liquidity so long as economic recovery remains in question.
Slow growth has silenced the monetarists on the ECB’s Governing Council. This will change, however, once the economic pick-up is confirmed.
Interest-rate hikes may be coming sooner rather than later, which is why Berlusconi and French President Jacques Chirac are talking up interest-rate cuts now.
Meanwhile, in Germany, the elections this September may have surprising consequences for ECB monetary policy.
Angela Merkel, the Christian Democrats’ candidate, is a reformer, holding out hope for Germany’s future – and that of Europe.
Unfortunately, Merkel’s campaign is off to a rocky start, and the recent entry of Oskar Lafontaine’s extreme left-wing party into the fray may necessitate the formation of a grand coalition between the Christian Democrats and the Social Democrats.
This would be bad news for the German economy, which could delay possible ECB interest rate hikes.
Because the expected gridlock in parliament would make reforms less likely, companies might hold off on investment, while consumers would be more likely to keep their wallets closed, because official policy would be even less clear than it is now.
On the other hand, a center-right coalition between the Christian Democrats and the Free Democrats could spark the ECB into action.
This raises an interesting point.
The public should be relieved if the ECB raises rates, because this would most likely signal that the long-awaited economic recovery is well under way, and that inflationary repercussions are being addressed.
A hike, in other words, would indicate that good things are happening.
But the public often views interest-rate increases as negative events that increase unemployment and stifle growth.
Blame-game politicians like Berlusconi, who have failed to put bread on the table, their minions in the media, and Keynesian economic professors who don’t understand and misrepresent Keynes sustain this distorted view.
Europe would be a lot better off if someone told the public the truth.
A Good Year for God
LONDON – It’s been a better year for God.
After withering literary assaults on the Almighty from the Oxford academic Richard Dawkins, the essayist Christopher Hitchens, and others, believers have hit back.
Best of all has been The Case for God by the brilliant religion writer Karen Armstrong.
More important still is the news that more people (certainly in Britain) are going to Christian churches of all denominations.
Moreover, the Pope made a very successful visit to Britain in September.
We know already about heavy attendance at the country’s mosques.
At this time of year, of course, many Christians who are not regular churchgoers attend the Nativity services.
Carols, church bells, and mangers are still at the heart of mid-winter festivities, alongside the consumer binge.
This year, however, the “big spend” in Europe may have been inhibited by the big winter freeze and the big austerity programs across most of the continent.
Even in the most Godless households, most children in Western societies probably know the details of the Christmas story.
The travelers who can find no room at the inn.
The birth of a baby in the stables.
The arrival of the wise men bearing gifts of gold, frankincense, and myrrh.
We learn about all this at the same time as we are told about Father Christmas, his Lapland reindeers, and his sacks full of presents.
We rapidly lose our belief in that winter myth.
But we tend to retain into adulthood the same views of God that we formed in childhood.
An old man with a long beard watches over us, and most of us retain a pretty literal opinion of the stories about his Son told in the Bible’s New Testament.
It is this God that atheists like Dawkins and Hitchens attack.
And, with such a target, it is not very difficult to poke holes and pile on the ridicule.
Leave aside the fact that you can make an even stronger case against Godlessness – remember the atrocities of atheist totalitarians in the twentieth century – and consider the assault on those whose commitment to literal interpretations of religious texts means that they deny science and reason.
To them the world was made in six days; evolution is a fanciful tale.
Those of us who think that science and religion dwell in different domains, and who recall that Socrates argued that science did not teach you about morality or meaning, find that our case is undermined by the literalists and fundamentalists in every religion.
There are Christians who know all about the fire and brimstone of the Book of Revelation, but seem not to have heard the instructions about generosity in the Sermon on the Mount.
Likewise, there are hard-line Jews, such as the settler groups who drive Palestinians from their homes in East Jerusalem and Hebron, who have forgotten the early teachings of Jewish scholars who argued that strangers should be treated like your own people.
And there are Muslims who ignore the Koran’s commands of pluralism, tolerance, and peace.
Where the atheist assault is often correct is in pinpointing the amount of harm frequently done in our world by such fundamentalists.
Right-wing American attitudes about their country’s place in the world are invigorated by fundamentalist dogma.
The United Nations is the devil’s own creation.
President Barack Obama is an un-American Muslim.
Palestine from the Jordan River to the coast should be handed to Israel so that the world can end with a cataclysmic Christian triumph.
Jewish fundamentalists obstruct any peace process that is left in the Middle East and build more illegal settlements.
Islamic fundamentalists define jihad as a war of terror against the West and call for an Islamic caliphate from the Atlantic to the Pacific.
The strident and damaging dogmatism of fundamentalists of every stripe has a common feature: a truculent sense of grievance, rooted in fear and resentment of modernity.
Christian fundamentalism in America harks back to nineteenth-century populism and anti-intellectualism.
Members of evangelical churches associate their beliefs with the rugged individualism of the early pioneers.
They are contemptuous of the establishment.
Jewish fundamentalists believe that Israel’s critics are anti-Semitic or, in the case of Jewish opponents of Israel’s harder-line policies, “self-hating Jews.”
Islamic fundamentalists reckon that what the rest of us regard as the liberalizing influence of technological progress and globalization is a brash re-run of Western colonialism.
For a happier New Year, we should listen to the core messages of all these great religions, above all the Confucian golden rule that we should never do to others what we would not like to be done to us.
What religion should teach us is not how to hate, but – to borrow again from Confucius – how to develop societies that look after and welcome the poor, the stranger, and the oppressed.
That is the most important message for everyone, atheists included, to take from the Christian story of Christmas.
A Gravity Test for the Euro
CAMBRIDGE – Although I appreciate that exchange rates are never easy to explain or understand, I find today’s relatively robust value for the euro somewhat mysterious.
Do the gnomes of currency markets seriously believe that the eurozone governments’ latest “comprehensive package” to save the euro will hold up for more than a few months?
The new plan relies on a questionable mix of dubious financial-engineering gimmicks and vague promises of modest Asian funding.
Even the best part of the plan, the proposed (but not really agreed) 50% haircut for private-sector holders of Greek sovereign debt, is not sufficient to stabilize that country’s profound debt and growth problems.
So how is it that the euro is trading at a 40% premium to the US dollar, even as investors continue to view southern European government debt with great skepticism?
I can think of one very good reason why the euro needs to fall, and six not-so-convincing reasons why it should remain stable or appreciate.
Let’s begin with why the euro needs to fall.
Absent a clear path to a much tighter fiscal and political union, which can lead only through constitutional change, the current halfway house of the euro system appears increasingly untenable.
It seems clear that the European Central Bank will be forced to buy far greater quantities of eurozone sovereign (junk) bonds.
That may work in the short term, but if sovereign default risks materialize – as my research with Carmen Reinhart suggests is likely – the ECB will in turn have to be recapitalized.
And, if the stronger northern eurozone countries are unwilling to digest this transfer – and political resistance runs high – the ECB may be forced to recapitalize itself through money creation.
Either way, the threat of a profound financial crisis is high.
Given this, what arguments support the current value of the euro, or its further rise?
First, investors might be telling themselves that in the worst-case scenario, the northern European countries will effectively push out the weaker countries, creating a super-euro.
But, while this scenario has a certain ring of truth, surely any breakup would be highly traumatic, with the euro diving before its rump form recovered.
Second, investors may be remembering that even though the dollar was at the epicenter of the 2008 financial panic, the consequences radiated so widely that, paradoxically, the dollar actually rose in value.
Although it may be difficult to connect the dots, it is perfectly possible that a huge euro crisis could have a snowball effect in the US and elsewhere.
Perhaps the transmission mechanism would be through US banks, many of which remain vulnerable, owing to thin capitalization and huge portfolios of mortgages booked far above their market value.
Third, foreign central banks and sovereign wealth funds may be keen to keep buying up euros to hedge against risks to the US and their own economies.
Government investors are not necessarily driven by the return-maximizing calculus that motivates private investors.
If foreign official demand is the real reason behind the euro’s strength, the risk is that foreign sovereign euro buyers will eventually flee, just as private investors would, only in a faster and more concentrated way.
Fourth, investors may believe that, ultimately, US risks are just as large as Europe’s.
True, the US political system seems stymied in coming up with a plan to stabilize medium-term budget deficits.
Whereas the US Congress’s “supercommittee,” charged with formulating a fiscal-consolidation package, will likely come up with a proposal, it is far from clear that either Republicans or Democrats will be willing to accept compromise in an election year.
Moreover, investors might be worried that the US Federal Reserve will weigh in with a third round of “quantitative easing,” which would further drive down the dollar.
Fifth, the current value of the euro does not seem wildly out of line on a purchasing-power basis.&#160; An exchange rate of $1.4:€1 is cheap for Germany’s export powerhouse, which could probably operate well even with a far stronger euro.
For the eurozone’s southern periphery, however, today’s euro rate is very difficult to manage.
Whereas some German companies persuaded workers to accept wage cuts to help weather the financial crisis, wages across the southern periphery have been marching steadily upwards, even as productivity has remained stagnant.
But, because the overall value of the euro has to be a balance of the eurozone’s north and south, one can argue that 1.4 is within a reasonable range.
Finally, investors might just believe that the eurozone leaders’ latest plan will work, even though the last dozen plans have failed.
Abraham Lincoln is credited with saying “You can fool some of the people all of the time, and all of the people some of the time, but you cannot fool all of the people all of the time.”
A comprehensive euro fix will surely arrive for some of the countries at some time, but not for all of the countries anytime soon.
So, yes, there are plenty of vaguely plausible reasons why the euro, despite its drawn-out crisis, has remained so firm against the dollar so far.
But don’t count on a stable euro-dollar exchange rate – much less an even stronger euro – in the year ahead.
A Green Alternative to Austerity?
OXFORD – While austerity in Europe faces increasing social resistance, in principle it has the merit of simplicity.
As the debate on fiscal consolidation versus growth intensifies, it is clear that there is little agreement on how to kick-start the economy, beyond fielding broad stimulus packages.
One idea is that environmental technology might feed a virtuous cycle of innovation and employment.
To some, green growth evokes a countryside covered with windmills and urban roofs lined with solar panels.
But it is broader than that.
For example, when Airbus moved from injection molding to 3D printing to produce the metal hinges for its airplanes’ doors, it reduced their weight by half, yielding phenomenal savings in material and associated fuel consumption over a lifetime of flying those hinges around the world.
Still, it is easier to find exciting anecdotes than it is to show how they scale up to revitalizing an entire economy.
Moreover, there is a great diversity of narratives on the green economy – and their proliferation is likely to grow.
This June, thousands of activists, policymakers, and business people will converge on Rio de Janeiro for the third giant United Nations Sustainable Development Conference (Rio+20), whose theme is the green economy.
The conference will unleash new arguments about green jobs, growth, cost increases, cost reductions, changes in values, consumer choice – green this and green that.
As a co-author of A New Growth Path for Europe, a report commissioned by the German government, I am guilty of contributing to this cacophony of complementary perspectives on green growth.
The European Climate Foundation had already published its Roadmap 2050, A Practical Guide to a Prosperous, Low-Carbon Europe.
Since then, the UN Environment Program has released its Green Economy Report; McKinsey has written about the Resource Revolution; and the International Trade Unions Council has published Growing Green and Decent Jobs – to name but a few.
All take somewhat different approaches and offer different recommendations, making it hard for policymakers to see the forest through the trees.
And, at the root of this multiplicity of perspectives lays the fact that economics struggles to explain how growth and innovation move an economy as a whole.
The macroeconomic models on which policymakers depend are solid tools in times of smooth and incremental evolution, but green growth is not about gradual change.
For example, the European Union’s goal of achieving an 80% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2050 implies a complete overhaul of EU infrastructure in just a few decades.
Economists’ inability to model such rapid, radical change should not be taken as a condemnation of the discipline; it is simply a reflection of the state of our knowledge, and of the fact that the economy is really, really complicated.
We simply do not yet have sufficiently precise insights into how all of its elements interact during times of far-reaching change, whether it be a financial crisis or a growth spurt.
Yet, the studies of green growth mentioned above all appear to provide such explanations.
So, what do they really tell us?
In practice, each is limited to just one or two aspects of the economy, and describes how these interact.
Growing Green and Decent Jobs looks at the relationship between investment and jobs.
A New Growth Path for Europe examines the impact of expectations and learning-by-doing.
Roadmap 2050 focuses on greening the power system.
The authors then make a leap of faith to derive conclusions about the economy as a whole.
But, while the value of these studies is in the light that they shed on the parts, the ensuing headlines invariably are about the whole, articulated in terms of GDP and jobs.
Each of the studies describes a part of a green economy, but none can capture the whole – not because they are deficient, but because it is simply beyond our capability.
That said, the fact that one cannot prove conclusively how green growth would work does not mean that we should give up on the idea.
We know from history that waves of innovation, from the steam engine to the information and communications revolution, have led to dramatic increases in economic growth.
We cannot prove that a wave of environmental innovation will have a similar effect, but the studies of the parts make such an outcome highly plausible.
As humans, we are uniquely equipped to make decisions on the basis of ambiguous information – in fact, we do it all the time.
When we choose a career or a spouse in our private lives, or when a politician seizes an opportunity from a plethora of possibilities, the task at hand is always about making highly consequential decisions based on imperfect information.
A big pile of green-growth reports demonstrates the plausibility of this path to recovery from an historic economic crisis.
It is now up to us to realize its potential.
Green growth offers a realistic alternative to the faltering austerity approach to overcoming the current economic crisis.
Policymakers should incorporate this thinking into the “beyond austerity” narrative that is taking shape in a growing number of key EU member states.
Ethics and Agriculture
MELBOURNE – Should rich countries – or investors based there – be buying agricultural land in developing countries?
That question is raised in Transnational Land Deals for Agriculture in the Global South, a report issued last year by the Land Matrix Partnership, a consortium of European research institutes and nongovernmental organizations.
The report shows that since 2000, investors or state bodies in rich or emerging countries have bought more than 83 million hectares (more than 200 million acres) of agricultural land in poorer developing countries.
This amounts to 1.7% of the world’s agricultural land.
Most of these purchases have been made in Africa, with two-thirds taking place in countries where hunger is widespread and institutions for establishing formal land ownership are often weak.
The purchases in Africa alone amount to an area of agricultural land the size of Kenya.
It has been claimed that foreign investors are purchasing land that has been left idle; thus, by bringing it into production, the purchases are increasing the availability of food overall.
But the Land Matrix Partnership report found that this is not the case: roughly 45% of the purchases involved existing croplands, and almost a third of the purchased land was forested, indicating that its development may pose risks for biodiversity.
The investments are both private and public (for example, by state-owned entities) and come from three different groups of countries: emerging economies like China, India, Brazil, South Africa, Malaysia, and South Korea; oil-rich Gulf states; and wealthy developed economies like the United States and several European countries.
On average, per capita income in the countries that are the source of these investments is four times higher than in the target countries.
Most of the investments are aimed at producing food or other crops for export from the countries in which the land is acquired, for the obvious reason that richer countries can pay more for the output.
More than 40% of such projects aim to export food to the source country – suggesting that food security is a major reason for buying the land.
Oxfam International calls some of these deals “land grabs.”
Its own report, Our Land, Our Lives,indicates that, since 2008, communities affected by World Bank projects have brought 21 formal complaints alleging violations of their land rights.
Oxfam, drawing attention to large-scale land acquisitions that have entailed direct rights violations, has called on the Bank to freeze investments in land purchases until it can set standards ensuring that local communities are informed of them in advance, with the option of refusing them.
Oxfam also wants the Bank to ensure that these land deals do not undermine either local or national food security.
In response, the World Bank agreed that there are instances of abuse in land acquisition, particularly in developing countries in which governance is weak, and said that it supported more transparent and inclusive participation.
At the same time, it pointed to the need to increase food production to feed the extra two billion people expected to be alive in 2050, and suggested that more investment in agriculture in developing countries is required to improve productivity.
The Bank rejected the idea of a moratorium on its own work with investors in agriculture, arguing that this would target precisely those who are most likely to do the right thing.
One may ask whether transparency and the requirement that local landholders consent to a sale is enough to protect people living in poverty.
Supporters of free markets will argue that if local landowners wish to sell their land, that is their choice to make.&#160;
But, given the pressures of poverty and the lure of cash, what does it take for people to be able to make a genuinely free and informed choice about selling something as significant as a right to land?
After all, we do not allow poor people to sell their kidneys to the highest bidder.
Of course, hardline supporters of free markets will say that we should.
But, at the very least, it needs to be explained why people should be prohibited from selling kidneys, but not from selling the land that grows their food.
Most people can live without one kidney.
No one can live without food.
Why does the purchase of body parts give rise to international condemnation, while the purchase of agricultural land does not – even when it involves evicting local landholders and producing food for export to rich countries instead of for local consumption?
The World Bank may indeed be more concerned about local landholders’ rights than other foreign investors are.
If so, the 21 complaints made against Bank projects are most likely the visible tip of a vast iceberg of violations of land rights by foreign investors in agricultural projects in developing countries – with the others remaining invisible because victims have no access to any complaint procedure.
One such case belatedly came to the attention of the United Nations Human Rights Committee.
In November, the Committee concluded that Germany had failed to police the Neumann Kaffee Gruppe regarding its complicity in the forced eviction of several villages in Uganda to make way for a large coffee plantation.
But the evictions took place in 2001, and the villagers are still living in extreme poverty.
They found no remedy, in either Uganda or Germany, for the violation of rights that, according to the Committee, they possess under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, to which Germany is a signatory.
Are we to believe that landholders fare better with Chinese or Saudi investors?
How to Feed the World
PRAGUE – Hunger has wracked humanity since time immemorial.
Nearly every major society has been shaped by famine; one estimate suggests that China suffered drought or flood-induced starvation in at least one province almost every year from 108 BC to 1911.
Yet the struggle against hunger is a battle that humanity could finally win.
More cereals were produced annually in the last quarter of the twentieth century than in any preceding period, and more grain will be harvested this year than at any time in history.
Since 1992, the number of hungry people worldwide has plummeted by more than 200 million, even as the human population grew by nearly two billion.
But enormous challenges remain.
Affordable, nutritious food is one of people’s top priorities everywhere, and one in nine people still do not get enough food to be healthy.
With today’s population of 7.3 billion expected to reach 8.5 billion by 2030 and 9.7 billion in 2050, food demand will increase accordingly.
Along with more mouths to feed, stresses on food supplies will include conflicts, economic volatility, extreme weather events, and climate change.
Increases in agricultural productivity, owing to improvements in seeds, new fertilizers and pesticides, improved credit access, and technological breakthroughs, have been a key driver in reducing hunger.
Between 1930 and 2000, agricultural output in the United States quadrupled, with productivity growth outstripping that of manufacturing.
Developing countries have begun sharing in these gains: responsible for next-to-none of the world’s fertilizer consumption in 1960, by 2000 they used more than industrialized countries.
The World Bank has found that productivity growth in agriculture can be up to four times more effective in reducing poverty than growth from other sectors.
So how do we keep up this progress?
Investment in research and development is vital.
According to research conducted for Copenhagen Consensus, which I direct, investing an extra $88 billion in agricultural R&D over the next 15 years would increase yields by an additional 0.4 percentage points each year, which could save 79 million people from hunger and prevent five million cases of child malnourishment.
Achieving these targets would be worth nearly $3 trillion in social good, implying an enormous return of $34 for every dollar spent.
Scientific breakthroughs also play a key role in fighting specific nutritional challenges such as vitamin A deficiency, the leading cause of preventable childhood blindness.
Robert Mwanga was awarded this year’s World Food Prize for inspiring work that resulted in the large-scale replacement of white sweet potato (with scant Vitamin A content) by a vitamin A-rich alternative in the diets of Uganda’s rural poor.
Another way to increase agricultural productivity is through labor.
When Copenhagen Consensus researchers examined responses to global warming in Bangladesh, they found that increasing agricultural labor productivity “is the only way to increase the resilience of Bangladesh to climate change and to meet long-term development goals.”
Investing around $9,000 per worker over two decades could boost agricultural productivity by 10%.
Bangladesh is an instructive case, because it is susceptible to flooding and the effects of climate change, and its agricultural productivity lags behind other developing and middle-income countries.
Unsurprisingly, the Bangladeshi prime minister’s office is striving to lead in global innovation, sustaining an agriculture innovation lab that shares best practices and ideas.
Copenhagen Consensus has worked with the world’s largest NGO, BRAC, to find out the policy wishes of people living in rural Bangladesh, including the “ultra-poor” with whom BRAC works closely.
These laborers, housewives, and others, some of whom live on the equivalent of $0.60-0.70 or less a day, are seldom given a place at the table to discuss policy.
Across nine rural forums in far-flung parts of the country, the participants overwhelmingly spoke with one voice, calling for the same policy priority: increased agricultural productivity.
“Everyone knows Rangpur has a Monga problem,” said a local from Chandpara in the Rangpur division, using the Bengali term for the annual cyclical phenomenon of seasonal hunger.
“We cannot feed our people two times a day – we need to increase our agricultural productivity.”
A Mukimabad villager had the same vision for Bangladesh: “We need crops and seeds which are not vulnerable to salinity and flood so that we do not have to die from food shortages.”
Humanity’s fight against hunger can be won.
Great progress has been made, but the world needs more agricultural R&D and higher productivity.
As a rural villager from Deukhola, near the Brahmaputra River in remote northern Bangladesh, starkly put it: “Our survival depends on it.”
We would do well to listen.
An Arab Marshall Plan
OXFORD – The wave of revolts that swept across the Arab world two years ago were fueled by demands for freedom, bread, and social justice.
But, although the revolutions toppled dictators and transformed societies, these core objectives remain as distant as ever.
In fact, the economic challenges facing the Arab Spring countries have become even more pressing, weighing heavily on these countries’ political prospects.
Unemployment has nearly doubled in Tunisia and Egypt, and foreign direct investment has dried up across the Arab world.
Tourism revenues, while resilient, are declining, and fiscal challenges remain considerable.
But the economic urgency is not reflected in the policy response, which has been painfully slow or non-existent.
For example, Egypt’s fiscal deficit will exceed 11% of GDP this year.
But the country’s leaders have been stalling on the terms of a much-needed International Monetary Fund loan.
The government’s reduction of fuel subsidies last year was not followed by additional reforms, and the required tax increase was delayed soon after President Mohamed Morsi announced it.
Almost all political stakeholders in Egypt, as in the other Arab countries in transition, recognize the need for economic reform.
But neither citizens nor policymakers appear willing to bear its social and political costs.
In a charged and uncertain political climate, in which new crises erupt on a daily basis, it is unsurprising that economic reform has been postponed repeatedly.
Politicians know that macroeconomic stabilization and social cohesion can be irreconcilable in the short run.
Slashing food and energy subsidies in order to reduce fiscal strain is unlikely to win favor in a country like Egypt, where 40% of per capita income is allocated to food.
Politics is thus constraining efforts to strengthen public finances.
At the same time, narrow IMF prescriptions threaten to exacerbate political instability, with citizens no longer afraid to take to the streets to demonstrate their dissatisfaction.
The current impasse on economic reform highlights a larger point: subsidy and tax regimes cannot be reformed without first redefining the underlying social contract, which has long exchanged welfare distribution for political acquiescence.
But such a move is far too risky for an individual politician, or even a single country, at a time of economic uncertainty and high unemployment.
In order to create the political space needed for economic reform, Arab leaders must underwrite a regional growth pact – a Marshall Plan of sorts – that would facilitate major new investments aimed at reviving economic activity.
It is much easier to reform subsidy programs when the economy is expanding.
Moreover, building competitive markets is essential to ensuring sustainable GDP growth.
To this end, regional trade barriers, which are more pervasive in the Arab world than even in Sub-Saharan Africa, must be dismantled.
By agreeing to the pact, Arab countries would commit to reforming their subsidy systems and to reducing restrictions on cross-border economic exchange.
The regional dimension of prosperity has long been ignored in the Arab world.
But weak regional linkages limit small firms’ growth potential, forcing them to depend on state patronage.
Although Arab leaders often cite Turkey as a beacon of hope, they rarely acknowledge that the country’s recent transformation from the “sick man of Europe” to one of the world’s fastest-growing emerging markets would not have been possible had it not pursued regional synergies.
Such linkages are particularly important for Egypt and Tunisia, which will struggle to reduce unemployment unless Libya’s labor market – which has historically absorbed migrants from its North African neighbors – is reopened.
And, while Tunisia’s situation seems to be the most promising, a crippling investment shortfall is threatening to derail reform efforts there.
With Europe mired in crisis, capital flows from Tunisia’s resource-rich Arab neighbors are its best hope.
Furthermore, Arab countries must ratchet up development spending.
Given that existing development banks in the region have largely failed to act as vehicles of coordination and commitment, a new institution – resembling the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development – would have to be established to oversee a regional aid push and underwrite the costs of economic transition.
New investment vehicles, such as sovereign wealth funds and Islamic finance, can contribute financing to credit-starved firms.
At the same time, Arab countries must streamline current aid efforts.
For too long, Arab governments have simply thrown money at problems, with the rich Gulf countries effectively subsidizing their troubled neighbors’ public services.
Over the last two years, Saudi Arabia has provided more than $3 billion to Yemen.
Qatar has provided &#160;$5 billion to Egypt since 2011, with a promise of $3 billion more.
And the United Arab Emirates recently pledged $2.5 billion to Bahrain.
But unconditional aid only delays reforms, because it weakens budget constraints, which reduces pressure on policymakers and creates moral hazard.
The Arab Spring has exposed fault lines that run not just through individual countries, but also through the entire region.
This calls for redefining relationships not only between citizens and states, but also among Arab countries.
Above all, it is no longer prudent to divide Arab countries between donors and recipients, or between resource-rich and resource-poor countries.
It is in the interest of the entire region – including those countries that do not seem to face an imminent threat of revolt – to contribute to their neighbors’ economic revival and facilitate their political transitions.
A History Lesson for Koizumi
Once again, protests against Japanese Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi’s annual visit to the Yasukuni shrine are breaking out in China as well as South Korea.
Koizumi’s insistence on paying homage to the war dead interred at Yasukuni, where convicted war criminals from World War II are among the buried, has been damaging relations with Japan’s neighbors for years.
Indeed, Chinese President Hu Jintao continually affirms that he will not hold a summit with a Japanese prime minister who goes to Yasukuni, which most Chinese regard as a glorification of past Japanese aggression and colonialism.
Even some in Japan are becoming critical of Koizumi.
While the public remains negative about Chinese outbursts against Japan, a recent survey indicates that more than 70% of Japanese view the current state of Japan-China relations as unacceptable.
More people are not supporting Koizumi’s annual pilgrimage to Yasukuni, with seven former prime ministers jointly demanding that he refrain from the visits.
Yet Koizumi remains defiant.
Moreover, Chief Cabinet Secretary Shinzu Abe, the front-runner to succeed him, has openly declared that he will continue to visit the shrine as prime minister.
Foreign Minister Taro Aso, another possible successor to Koizumi, has called for the Japanese Emperor to pray at Yasukuni.
So pessimism appears to be settling in, and the deadlock over Yasukuni appears to be deepening.
But the past can bring us more than just troubles of this kind.
Even on the issue of Yasukuni, there are positive lessons to be learned.
Consider Yasuhiro Nakasone, Koizumi’s predecessor in the 1980’s.
Both are master politicians who remained popular and served long terms in office.
Both are conservative and nationalistic, advocating the revision of the constitution and an assertive political and military role for Japan abroad.
Finally, both are pro-American, with Nakasone declaring Japan to be America’s “unsinkable aircraft carrier” in East Asia and Koizumi sending troops to Iraq in support of the United States-led war effort.
But a crucial difference between Nakasone and Koizumi is often overlooked: their handling of the Yasukuni controversy and relations with China.
Nakasone broke the taboo by being the first prime minister to worship at the Yasukuni shrine in his official capacity on August 15, 1985, the fortieth anniversary of the end of World War II.
The decision triggered a severe response from China, where students held demonstrations against his visit.
Bilateral relations were frozen.
But, instead of capitalizing on domestic resentment over China’s criticisms, Nakasone decided not to visit Yasukuni again.
He chose to mend relations with China by focusing on the positive aspects of bilateral ties.
In 1986, Nakasone went to Beijing at the personal invitation of Chinese Communist Party General Secretary Hu Yaobang and laid the cornerstone for a Sino-Japanese Youth Exchange Center, promising to forge future friendships with China.
This genuine embrace of reconciliation provided much-needed support to Chinese leaders, who were eager to control anti-Japanese sentiments.
Hu praised Nakasone’s courage and warned Chinese youth publicly that if they “think merely of the well-being of their own country… they are not sober-minded patriots.”
Nakasone emerged from the crisis and was recognized as a capable statesman in managing Japan’s diplomacy with China.
There was no accusation that Nakasone was “selling out” to Beijing.
Nor were his conservative, nationalist, and pro-American credentials damaged.
This episode suggests that Koizumi’s hardline position isn’t the only option.
A Japanese prime minister can be strong without exploiting domestic resentment against the country’s neighbors, and conservative, patriotic, and pro-American while forging a healthy working relationship with China.
Indeed, the cessation of Yasukuni visits would likely open the door to the long-overdue Sino-Japanese summit, which in turn might strengthen moderate voices in China seeking a future-oriented relationship with Japan.
Unfortunately, Koizumi and his allies are not prepared to move forward on the Yasukuni issue.
As Foreign Minister Aso recently put it: “The more China voices [opposition], the more one feels like going there.
It’s just like when you’re told ‘Don't smoke cigarettes,’ it actually makes you want to smoke.”
No one expects the current Japanese and Chinese leaders to embrace, as Nakasone and Hu did two decades ago, but it is a sad state of affairs when the leaders of neighboring giants pretend not to see each other at international forums.
If Nakasone, who now urges Koizumi to stop the Yasukuni pilgrimage, were to respond to Aso, he might simply extend the analogy: it is not in Japan’s national interest to continue to inhale Koizumi’s second-hand smoke.
Israel versus America versus Iran
TEL AVIV – Israel’s concern about the specter of a nuclear Iran has now degenerated into a crisis of confidence concerning the United States.
Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu has embarked on a campaign to force President Barack Obama to set a red line that Iran must not cross, lest it risk unleashing an American military response.
Implicit threats of a unilateral Israeli attack, together with conspicuous meddling in the US presidential election campaign, have compounded Netanyahu’s effort to twist Obama’s arm.
The controversy between the two allies partly reflects their divergent timelines: for Israel, the red line is Iran’s imminent burial deep underground of its uranium-enrichment facilities; for the US, it is the start of a dedicated weapons program.
Indeed, they probably contemplate land incursions into Iran, and possibly a decisive –&#160;and, from their perspective, long overdue – showdown with Hamas in Gaza and Hezbollah in Lebanon.
Though determined to prevent Iran from acquiring nuclear weapons, even if doing so requires military action, the US weighs the consequences of a military showdown in very different terms.
A superpower that has earned only frustration in its abortive efforts – whether war or regional diplomacy – in the dysfunctional Middle East, the US faces the Iran crisis in the midst of its epochal strategic shift to Asia and the Pacific.
The fallout from a war in Iran would pin down the US in the Middle East for years to come, undermining its new strategic priorities.
As a result, the US, though certainly better equipped than Israel for a war to ensure that Iran forever abandons its nuclear ambitions, could nonetheless conclude that that objective is simply too costly.
The recent report by The Iran Project, whose signatories include the former US national security advisers Brent Scowcroft and Zbigniew Brzezinski, concluded that an American military attack on Iran could only delay its nuclear program for up to four years.
To guarantee that Iran never acquires a nuclear bomb, the US would need to maintain military pressure on Iran for several years.
And, if forced to impose regime change as the ultimate solution to the dilemma, the report assumes that this would require military occupation, which would entail a commitment of resources and personnel greater than what the US invested in the Iraq and Afghanistan wars combined.
Moreover, the conventional assumption that the region’s Sunni Arab regimes would give tacit approval to a military attack on Iran’s nuclear installations must be revisited in the wake of the Arab Spring – particularly in the aftermath of the recent, sudden upsurge in anti-American violence throughout the Muslim world.
The pre-Arab Spring paradigm that framed the Middle East as being divided between “moderates” and “extremists” has become obsolete.
The Islamist governments that have emerged from the downfall of America’s puppet regimes are no friends of an Iranian nuclear empire.
But, in their struggle to survive, they must channel popular anti-Americanism.
For Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi, that imperative meant placating the angry mob that recently attacked the US embassy rather than merely condemning the violence.
An attack on Iran, especially if it develops into a longer war involving regional proxies, is bound to become the trigger for mass anti-Israel and anti-US hysteria, which might draw the Islamist regimes in the region into a dynamic of escalation.
It would be impossible to rule out a regional war.
The main problem facing a military operation in Iran is the need to ensure its legitimacy.
China and Russia would never allow the US to secure a United Nations mandate for an attack.
Moreover, while Iranian provocations that clearly reveal the regime’s intentions to develop a nuclear-weapons capability might help build support for American military action, it is far from certain that Europeans, or others, would rush to join another US-led “coalition of the willing.”
The dire legacy of Iraq and Afghanistan weighs heavily on the Western democracies.
The saddest part of the story is Israel’s utter indifference to the need to build international legitimacy for its drive to stop Iran’s nuclear program.
Netanyahu thinks in bold military terms, not in terms of geopolitical strategy.
His careless Palestine policy has left Israel with few friends in the international community, let alone in the Arab Middle East.
Indeed, many regard Netanyahu’s Iran obsession as nothing more than a successful ploy to divert attention from the Palestinian issue.
Only a generous, bold peace initiative that would genuinely revive the two-state solution, accompanied by a freeze on construction and enlargement of West Bank settlements, would help to recover the good will of the Palestinians and their brethren throughout the Arab world.
And only that outcome can secure the international goodwill that both Israel and the US will need for a showdown with Iran.
A Human Rights Crime In Gaza
Israeli bombs and missiles periodically strike the encapsulated area, causing high casualties among both militants and innocent women and children.
Prior to the highly publicized killing of a woman and her four little children last week, this pattern was illustrated by a previous report from B’Tselem, the leading Israeli human rights organization: 106 Palestinians were killed between February 27 and March 3. Fifty-four of them were civilians who didn't take part in the fighting, and 25 were under 18 years of age.
On a recent trip through the Middle East, I attempted to gain a better understanding of the crisis.
One of my visits was to Sderot, a community of about 20,000 in southern Israel that is frequently struck by rudimentary rockets fired from nearby Gaza.
I condemned these attacks as abominable and an act of terrorism, since most of the thirteen victims during the past seven years have been non-combatants.
Subsequently, I met with leaders of Hamas, both a delegation from Gaza and the top officials in Damascus, Syria.
I made the same condemnation to them, and urged that they declare a unilateral ceasefire or orchestrate with Israel a mutual agreement to terminate all military action in and around Gaza for an extended period.
They responded that such previous action by them had not been reciprocated, and they reminded me that Hamas had previously insisted on a ceasefire throughout Palestine including both Gaza and the West Bank, which Israel had refused.
Hamas then made a public proposal of a mutual ceasefire restricted to Gaza, which the Israelis considered and also rejected.
There are fervent arguments heard on both sides concerning blame for a lack of peace in the Holy Land.
Israel has occupied and colonized the Palestinian West Bank, which is approximately one-fourth (28.5%) the size of the nation of Israel as recognized by the international community.
Some Israeli religious factions claim a right to the land on both sides of the Jordan River, and others aver that their 205 settlements with some 500,000 people are necessary for “security.”
All Arab nations have agreed to full recognition of Israel if it will comply with key United Nations resolutions.
Hamas has agreed to accept any negotiated peace settlement between Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas and Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert, provided it is approved in a referendum among the Palestinian people.
This holds promise of progress, but despite the brief fanfare and positive statements at the peace conference last November in Annapolis, Maryland, a retrogression has occurred in the process.
Nine thousand new Israeli settlement housing units have been announced in Palestine, the number of roadblocks within the West bank has increased, and the stranglehold on Gaza has been tightened.
It is one thing for other leaders to defer to the US on the crucial peace negotiations, but the world must not stand idle while innocent people are treated cruelly.
It is time for strong voices in Europe, the US, Israel, and elsewhere to speak out and condemn this human rights tragedy among the Palestinian people. 
A Hundred Years of Superconductivity
CHICAGO – The world’s first “quantum” computer – a machine that harnesses the magic of quantum phenomena to perform memory and processing tasks incredibly faster than today’s silicon-based computer chips – was recently sold by D-Wave Systems of Canada to Lockheed-Martin.
And, while some question whether the machine is truly a quantum computer, its designers have published articles in peer-reviewed journals demonstrating that the basic elements of this novel computer are indeed superconducting quantum bits.
This spring marked the 100th anniversary of the discovery of superconductivity – the ability of materials to carry electrical current with no loss.
Currents set up in superconducting wires can exist for years without any measurable decay.
Because of this property, superconductors have unique features that can be exploited in many ways.
They can carry enormous amounts of current, making them ideal for urban power grids. And, when wound into coils, they can produce extremely strong magnetic fields.
Such superconducting magnets have been applied in a variety of technologies.
The best-known examples are the magnets that drive the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) machines found in most hospitals.
Perhaps the most exotic are the huge magnets used to accelerate particles in the Large Hadron Collider, which seeks to discover the fundamental principles of matter.
Despite their great promise, however, superconductors have limits, the primary one being that most superconduct at very low temperatures – indeed, near absolute zero (-273 ºC).
Such temperatures can be achieved only through liquid-helium cooling.
Thus, Swiss researchers caused excitement in 1986 by announcing the discovery of superconductivity in an oxide of copper at twice the temperature of the previous record holder.
Shortly thereafter, researchers in the United States found a related material that superconducts above the temperature at which air liquefies.
As Time magazine proclaimed in May 1987, with the discovery of these so-called “cuprates,” the superconducting revolution had begun.
Alas, the revolution soon bogged down.
Cuprates are notoriously difficult materials to work with, because they are very brittle.
This is exacerbated by their strong anisotropy – the materials have a quasi-two-dimensional structure consisting of a weakly coupled stack of conducting sheets. As such, they are a challenge for industry, though applications are beginning to appear.
Since the cuprates first appeared, a variety of other “high temperature” superconductors have been discovered – one is a simple compound of magnesium and boron, and another involves a mixture of iron and arsenic.
Although none of them superconduct at temperatures as high as liquid air, they may ultimately be better materials with which to work.
Given the vast number of combinations of elements that can form compounds, there is a good chance that better superconductors await our discovery.
In the coming years, superconductors are expected to play a growing role in technology.
Already, “second generation” cuprate wires are being used to make high-capacity cables for electric-power transmission, and lighter-weight generators for wind turbines.
Stronger superconducting magnets are leading to the development of MRIs with more sophisticated diagnostic capabilities.
Superconductors are being used for levitated trains in high-speed rail transport, and as microwave filters for improved signal bandwidth in cellular base stations.
The discovery of a new superconductor with enhanced properties could lead to even greater technological innovation.
This brings us to the intellectual challenge of superconductors.
It took 46 years from the discovery of superconductivity to the 1957 Bardeen, Cooper, and Schrieffer (BCS) theory of how the phenomenon occurs.
Along the way, a number of famous physicists tried and failed to get the answer – Albert Einstein, Werner Heisenberg, and Richard Feynman being notable examples.
Discovering the solution required the development of advanced theoretical techniques.
What had been difficult to figure out was how to get electrons to superconduct.
The basic discovery of BCS was that if the electrons pair up, those couples could indeed superconduct.
Fortunately, the mechanism for such coupling was known.
Although electrons are negatively charged, and therefore repel one another, the positive ions that they leave behind when they flow through a metal can mediate an effective attraction between two electrons under restrictive conditions (for example, the metal must be very cold).
The suspicion, though, is that this is not the case in the new superconductors.
Cuprates superconduct at much higher temperatures, but, more importantly, they possess some exotic properties: they are formed by doping electrical carriers into a host material that is a magnetic insulator – the last place one would look for a conventional superconductor.
And, unlike BCS theory, in which the pairs are isotropic – with identical properties in all directions in space – the pairs in cuprates are strongly anisotropic, resembling a cloverleaf.
How can one pair electrons without ions holding them together, thereby enabling higher-temperature superconductors?
While ideas about this abound, new theoretical breakthroughs most likely will be needed to develop the machinery required to solve such electron-electron theories, perhaps even involving black holes.
Whatever the theory turns out to be, it is certain to revolutionize physics.
A Better Global Framework to End AIDS
STOCKHOLM, GENEVA – This week, we celebrate the tremendous progress that has been made in the struggle against HIV and AIDS.
In many countries with strong health systems, HIV is no longer a death sentence, but a chronic condition.
And Africa has reached a critical milestone: each year, there are now more Africans starting HIV treatment than being infected.
Still, even as we celebrate, we must also mourn the 1.1 million people who lost their lives to the disease this year.
HIV still infects 6,000 people every day, and AIDS remains a leading cause of death among children, adolescents, and women in Africa.
The movement against AIDS has inspired all of us to help the people who continue to be left behind, and to commit to ending AIDS once and for all.
Fortunately, we already have the know-how, resources, and, crucially, the political momentum to do this; and at the High-Level Meeting on Ending AIDS this year, United Nations member states made ambitious commitments that will put us on the fast track toward our goal.
What’s more, in September, Canada hosted a successful financing conference for the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria, which brought in almost $13 billion, replenishing the Global Fund for 2017-2019.
Meanwhile, individual countries have increased their domestic investments, and international partners – big and small – have maintained their support, which is how we will reach the $26 billion needed for the global AIDS response in 2020.
But funding parts of the global health system is not enough.
The international community must take a more holistic view and reinforce a global-response architecture that features a clear division of labor and seamless cooperation among various stakeholders.
Providing the necessary support will require donors to coordinate with one another, so that all parts of the existing architecture for managing global health issues are adequately funded.
This will then ensure that all countries – and, more importantly, all people – receive the support they need.
UNAIDS is setting a powerful example for international collaboration, by organizing partners around a common 2016-2021 Strategy to end AIDS.
This unique and innovative partnership brings together 11 co-sponsoring UN agencies, each with diverse sector-specific expertise, and mobilizes various government stakeholders.
Partners include business, community, and faith leaders, as well as teachers, judges, members of law enforcement, parliamentarians, and many others outside the health sector whose actions nonetheless affect health outcomes.
One of UNAIDS’ tasks is to encourage national governments to keep AIDS high on their public-health agendas, and to invest in joint efforts to end the disease.
It is also the only organization with a mandate to set norms and standards for the global response to AIDS, which means that it plays a key role in the current international framework.
UNAIDS maintains a close partnership with the Global Fund.
It has a presence in more than 80 countries, and its regional teams provide technical support and strategic information, which helps the Global Fund direct its grants to the right programs, locations, and populations at sufficient scale.
Moreover, it helps to create the social, legal, and political conditions for people to use health services, not least by promoting gender equality and ensuring that populations at higher risk of contracting HIV do not face adverse discrimination.
UNAIDS engages with civil society at all levels, by leveraging the international AIDS response to promote equality, dignity, and human rights around the world.
As such, UNAIDS works to expand the political space for – and investment in – civil society.
Yet, despite its broad mandate and many functions, UNAIDS lacks adequate resources, which threatens past achievements and future programs alike, and poses a danger to people and communities that depend on the lifesaving support the organization helps facilitate.
Sweden and UNAIDS will work together to ensure that the international AIDS response continues to transform – and save – lives.
We will safeguard and empower women and girls, and make sure that vulnerable populations’ voices are heard.
But, at the same time, the international community must strengthen the existing framework for managing global-health issues.
As Swedish Prime Minister Stefan Löfven said in Montreal in September: “Today we are focusing on the Global Fund, but tomorrow let’s not forget to provide sufficient funding for the entire global health architecture.”
It is time for the international community to meet that challenge, by pledging to support our global health infrastructure, so that no agency – and no country or person – is left out.
Aid Works
NEW YORK – The critics of foreign aid are wrong.
A growing flood of data shows that death rates in many poor countries are falling sharply, and that aid-supported programs for health-care delivery have played a key role.
Aid works; it saves lives.
One of the newest studies, by Gabriel Demombynes and Sofia Trommlerova, shows that Kenya’s infant mortality (deaths under the age of one year) has plummeted in recent years, and attributes a significant part of the gain to the massive uptake of anti-malaria bed nets.
These findings are consistent with an important study of malaria death rates by Chris Murray and others, which similarly found a significant and rapid decline in malaria-caused deaths after 2004 in sub-Saharan Africa resulting from aid-supported malaria-control measures.
Let’s turn back the clock a dozen years.
In 2000, Africa was struggling with three major epidemics.
AIDS was killing more than two million people each year, and spreading rapidly.
Malaria was surging, owing to the parasite’s growing resistance to the standard medicine at the time.
Tuberculosis was also soaring, partly as a result of the AIDS epidemic and partly because of the emergence of drug-resistant TB.
In addition, hundreds of thousands of women were dying in childbirth each year, because they had no access to safe deliveries in a clinic or hospital, or to emergency help when needed.
These interconnected crises prompted action.
The United Nations’ member states adopted the Millennium Development Goals in September 2000.
Three of the eight MDGs – reductions in children’s deaths, maternal deaths, and epidemic diseases – focus directly on health.
Likewise, the World Health Organization issued a major call to scale up development assistance for health.
And African leaders, led by Nigeria’s president at the time, Olusegun Obasanjo, took on the challenge of battling the continent’s epidemics.
Nigeria hosted two landmark summits, on malaria in 2000 and on AIDS in 2001, which were a crucial spur to action.
At the second of these summits, then-UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan called for the creation of the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, TB, and Malaria.
The Global Fund began operations in 2002, financing prevention, treatment, and care programs for the three diseases.
High-income countries also finally agreed to reduce the debt owed by heavily indebted poor countries, allowing them to spend more on health care and less on crippling payments to creditors.
The United States also took action, adopting two major programs, one to fight AIDS and the other to fight malaria.
In 2005, the UN Millennium Project recommended specific ways to scale up primary health care in the poorest countries, with the high-income countries helping to cover the costs that the poorest could not pay by themselves.
The UN General Assembly backed many of the project’s recommendations, which were then implemented in numerous low-income countries.
Donor aid did start to rise sharply as a result of all of these efforts.
In 1995, total aid for health care was around $7.9 billion.
This inadequate level then crept up slowly, to $10.5 billion by 2000.
By 2005, however, annual aid for health had jumped another $5.9 billion, and by 2010, the total had grown by another $10.5 billion, to reach $26.9 billion for the year.
The expanded funding allowed major campaigns against AIDS, TB, and malaria; a major scaling up of safe childbirth; and increased vaccine coverage, including the near-eradication of polio.
Many innovative public-health techniques were developed and adopted.
With one billion people living in high-income countries, total aid in 2010 amounted to around $27 per person in the donor countries – a modest sum for them, but a life-saving one for the world’s poorest people.
The public-health successes can now be seen on many fronts.
Around 12 million children under five years old died in 1990.
By 2010, this number had declined to around 7.6 million – still far too high, but definitely an historic improvement.
Malaria deaths in children in Africa were cut from a peak of around one million in 2004 to around 700,000 by 2010, and, worldwide, deaths of pregnant women declined by almost half between 1990 and 2010, from an estimated 543,000 to 287,000.
Another $10-15 billion in annual aid (that is, roughly $10-15 more per person in the high-income world), bringing total aid to around $40 billion per year, would enable still greater progress to be made in the coming years.
The opponents of aid are not merely wrong.
Their vocal antagonism still threatens the funding that is needed to get the job done, to cut child and maternal deaths by enough to meet the MDGs by 2015 in the poorest countries, and to continue after that to ensure that all people everywhere finally have access to basic health services.
A decade of significant progress in health outcomes has proved the skeptics wrong.
Aid for health care works – and works magnificently – to save and improve lives.
Let us continue to support these life-saving programs, which uphold the dignity and well-being of all people on the planet.
The AIIB and Global Governance
HONG KONG – Despite official American and Japanese opposition, 57 countries have opted to be among the founding members of the China-led Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB).
Regardless of what naysayers believe, this remarkable turn of events can only benefit global economic governance.
According to former US Treasury Secretary Larry Summers, the AIIB’s establishment “may be remembered as the moment the United States lost its role as the underwriter of the global economic system.”
Asia Development Bank (ADB) President Takehiko Nakao, by contrast, does not believe that there will be a “major change to the world of development finance,” though he conceded that “there can be interpretations as to the symbolic meaning of this.”
Who is right will depend largely on the decisions that the AIIB’s top shareholders make regarding its operating structure.
So far, the AIIB has not sought to amend the principle that the largest contributor to a multilateral organization gets the largest say in running it.
Just as the US dominates the World Bank and Europe leads the International Monetary Fund, China will head the AIIB.
This implies a larger global leadership role for China – which the world, including its traditional powers, should welcome.
After all, global leadership is not just a matter of might; it also reflects the provision of global public goods.
When World War II ended, the US, aside from being the world’s leading military and economic power, was the largest provider of such goods, through the Marshall Plan, support for the United Nations, and contributions to the Bretton Woods institutions (the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank).
But massive debts have lately undermined the ability of the US – not to mention Europe and Japan – to continue making such large contributions.
Fortunately, China is willing and able to fill the gap.
In fact, China might have done so within the Bretton Woods institutions, were the distribution of voting rights within them not skewed so heavily toward the incumbents, who still enjoy veto power.
For example, China has a 3.8% voting share in the IMF and World Bank, even though it accounts for more than 12% of world GDP.
The United Kingdom and France – which are one-third the size of China – each have a 4.3% share.
With the incumbents unwilling to bring China’s voting share in line with its economic might, China had little choice but to launch its own institution.
But the AIIB has its own objectives, which do not align precisely with those of, say, the World Bank.
Specifically, the bank is a critical element of China’s “one belt, one road” strategy, which encompasses two initiatives: the overland Silk Road Economic Belt, connecting China to Europe, and the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road, linking China to Southeast Asia, the Middle East, and Europe.
While the US “pivots” to the east, China is pirouetting west, applying the lessons of its development to its trading partners across Eurasia and beyond.
Perhaps the most important of these lessons is that connectivity is vital to economic growth.
Over the last three decades, the construction of roads, railways, ports, airports, and telecommunications systems in China has fostered trade, attracted investment, and, by linking the country’s land-locked western and southern provinces to its more prosperous coastal areas, helped to reduce regional disparities.
China’s Silk Road initiative, which aims to boost prosperity among China’s trading partners largely through infrastructure investment, is a logical next step – one on which China is spending significantly.
In addition to its initial contribution of up to $50 billion to the AIIB, China has committed $40 billion to its Silk Road Fund, $32 billion to the China Development Bank, and $30 billion to the Export-Import Bank of China.
According to estimates by HSBC, the “one belt, one road” initiative could end up costing as much as $232 billion – just under two-thirds of the World Bank’s balance sheet in 2014.
The $100 billion AIIB will play a central role in this effort.
Given massive global demand for infrastructure finance – which, according to ADB estimates, will amount to $8 trillion in Asia alone over the next decade – the AIIB should not be considered a threat to the World Bank, the ADB, or other multilateral lenders.
Nonetheless, it will compete with them, owing to its distinctive – and probably more efficient – approach to lending.
In fact, the AIIB’s operations will most likely resemble those of the World Bank in the 1960s, when engineers with hands-on development experience dominated the staff and could design lending conditions that worked for borrowers.
In the late 1980s, the World Bank began to implement the Washington Consensus, pushing for economic and political liberalization, without sufficient regard for local political or economic realities.
The result was conditional lending, with terms – created mostly by policy wonks – that many developing-country borrowers could not meet (at least not without hiring consultants to adjust their official reporting).
The acid test of the AIIB’s effectiveness will be its governance model.
One failing of the Bretton Wood institutions is their full-time shareholder boards of directors, which tend to undermine effectiveness by micro-managing and often requesting conflicting lending conditions.
The World Bank has wasted far too much time re-organizing itself under various presidents, without recognizing the fundamental problem with its own governance structure.
Even if the AIIB does not deliver as promised, its establishment is an important reminder that in a fast-changing world, economic governance cannot remain stagnant.
If Western leaders really do believe in innovation, competition, and meritocracy, they should welcome the AIIB.
AIPAC in Decline
MADRID – The American Israel Public Affairs Committee’s lobbying power in the United States is undeniable.
But AIPAC’s supposed ability to control US policy decisions is a Potemkin village myth, cultivated by friends and rivals alike.
In fact, thanks to Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu, AIPAC’s influence is under threat – though Netanyahu himself will be just fine.
Claims about AIPAC’s clout have long shaped analysis of US foreign policy.
For example, Steve Walt and John Mearsheimer, in their notorious essay “The Israel Lobby,” asserted that AIPAC manufactured the Iraq War.
But the reality is far less sinister: in that case, AIPAC merely surfed on the pro-invasion wave unleashed by President George W. Bush, with his Messianic urges, and Vice President Dick Cheney, a one-man war lobby.
The truth about AIPAC – that it is influential, but far from invulnerable – has recently been revealed, both to the public and to the group itself.
Having been pushed by Netanyahu into an unwinnable fight against US President Barack Obama’s administration over its nuclear deal with Iran, AIPAC is now crumbling under the weight of its own hubris.
In fact, AIPAC has never overcome resolute opposition from an American president, particularly in a matter of US national security.
It failed to stop Jimmy Carter from selling F-15 Eagle fighters to Saudi Arabia in 1978, or to prevent Ronald Reagan from supplying AWACS reconnaissance planes to the Saudis three years later.
And its 1991 battle with President George H.W. Bush over the linkage of US loan guarantees for Israel with Prime Minister Yitzak Shamir’s support of the 1991 Madrid peace conference – one of Bush’s key legacies – ended in defeat.
Against this background, AIPAC should have known that its attempt, in close cooperation with Obama’s Republican opponents, to block the Iran nuclear deal (one of Obama’s most important achievements) would fail.
Indeed, Obama even used a tactic similar to that of George H.W. Bush to win the day.
Just as Bush openly denounced the “thousand lobbyists” working the halls of the US Congress against a vital national interest, Obama said in a conference call that his critics “would be opposed to any deal with Iran,” and called out AIPAC’s $20 million advertising campaign against the agreement.
He also put AIPAC in the same category as the Republicans who “were responsible” for leading the US into the Iraq war.
For AIPAC – which has traditionally relied on a broad coalition of social and political forces in the US that view Israel’s security as both a moral cause and a vital national interest – this is not any old defeat.
The Republican-backed crusade against a key agreement negotiated by a Democratic president, with his party’s overwhelming support, has threatened the bipartisan foundations of Israel’s cause in America.
Of course, the nuclear deal involved more than just the US and Iran.
AIPAC was opposing an international agreement that six major world powers – China, France, Germany, Russia, the United Kingdom, and the US – had already signed and that the United Nations had approved.
Even some of Israel’s staunchest supporters in Congress were unlikely to deal a potentially devastating blow to America’s international credibility, and the idea that the negotiating countries would all agree to reopen the talks to produce a “better deal” was sheer fantasy.
Yet that is the objective that Netanyahu set for AIPAC.
The row over the Iran deal is bound to be a watershed moment for American Jews, among whom sharp divisions have formed.
Indeed, the American Jewish Committee 2015 Survey of American Jewish Opinion reports the emergence of “two diverging Jewish sub-communities,” with a growing number of Jews feeling alienated by the organizations that claim to represent them.
AIPAC represents a striking anomaly in the life of American Jews.
It is increasingly identified with the Republican agenda and Israel’s evangelical Christian supporters, even though polls have repeatedly shown that Jews are America’s most liberal ethnic group.
The truth is that American Jews largely opposed the Iraq war.
They overwhelmingly vote for the Democratic Party.
They define their religion as moderate and liberal, with many upholding gay rights and abortion, both anathema to evangelical Christians.
The majority of American Jews even support the creation of a Palestinian state.
And, although they are far from united on the Iran deal, the agreement’s supporters outnumber its opponents.
Much of the blame for the damage that has been done – to AIPAC, American Jewish communities, and even the US political process – falls on Netanyahu.
But he is unlikely to face retribution for any of it.
On the contrary, the Obama administration has already begun the discussions it promised on upgrading Israel’s strategic capabilities.
As Arab countries throughout the Middle East melt down – with increasingly significant spillover effects in the West – Israel continues to represent a stable regional partner for the US.
More dangerous, Netanyahu could achieve his next goal: preventing a strategic détente between the US and Iran that would enable cooperation in resolving major regional conflicts, from Yemen to Syria.
After all, Obama’s victory on the nuclear deal may have been inevitable, but it was far from easy.
An odd coalition of Iranian radicals, AIPAC, the Saudi-led Sunni alliance, the Israeli government, and US politicians from both parties have already compelled Obama to promise additional sanctions on Iran for its sponsorship of terrorism.
As a result, America’s cold war with Iran is likely to persist.
Lahirnya Transportasi Udara yang Ramah Iklim
MONTREAL – Seiring meningkatnya konektivitas global, kebutuhan atas transportasi udara terus bertambah, diperkirakan lebih dari 30.000 pesawat berukuran besar akan mengudara dalam beberapa tahun ke depan.
Tetapi, jika kita ingin mempertahankan perkembangan ini tanpa memperburuk perubahan iklim, kita harus dengan cepat mengurangi emisi CO2 terkait penerbangan, sebuah hal mendesak dan tidak termuat dalam Perjanjian Paris mengenai perubahan iklim yang ditandatangani lebih dari 190 negara pada bulan Desember lalu.
Untungnya, sekarang merupakan waktu yang tepat untuk memisahkan emisi penerbangan dari pertumbuhan perjalanan udara.
Perwakilan dari 191 negara bertemu di Montreal pekan ini untuk menghadiri Sesi ke-39 Pertemuan Organisasi Penerbangan Sipil Dunia (ICAO) di bawah naungan PBB; setelah melalui perselisihan selama puluhan tahun, akhirnya mereka menyepakati perjanjian iklim khusus industri penerbangan.
Kerangka ICAO yang baru bertujuan mencapai “pertumbuhan netral karbon” (carbon-neutral growth) dalam sektor penerbangan dunia dimulai tahun 2020 dan seterusnya, juga memuat aturan pokok yaitu upaya global berbasis pasar (GMBM atau global market-based measure) untuk membantu maskapai memangkas emisi karbon sesuai target pada tahun 2020, tanpa mengeluarkan banyak biaya.
Saat diterapkan nanti, kerangka tersebut menjadi skema pembatas emisi karbon pertama untuk industri skala global yang tidak akan berdampak pada kenaikan biaya secara besar-besaran untuk konsumen.
Maskapai bisa membeli penurunan emisi dari sektor perekonomian lainnya, sehingga akan menyalurkan miliaran dolar untuk pembangunan rendah karbon di seluruh dunia.
Selama enam tahun pertama, kerangka baru ini hanya akan diberlakukan untuk penerbangan antar negara yang sudah mengadopsinya secara sukarela, berarti ICAO harus mendorong partisipasi yang cukup agar program tersebut bisa efektif.
Pendekatan opsional tersebut mendapat banyak kritik, tapi pertanyaan apakah sebuah program harus dibuat “wajib” atau “sukarela” tidak penting disini, sebab perjanjian internasional umumnya hanya berlaku terhadap negara-negara berdaulat yang setuju menjadi pihak.
Sekitar 64 negara telah mengisyaratkan kesediaan untuk menandatangani perjanjian ICAO dan jumlahnya setara dengan 80% perkiraan kenaikan emisi CO2 di atas tingkat emisi rujukan tahun 2020.
Memang ini tidak sempurna tapi mencerminkan awal yang cukup baik, dan diharapkan negara-negara lain akan berpartisipasi ketika menyaksikan manfaat yang dipetik dari pembangunan rendah karbon.
Maskapai pun akan menyambut kerangka global yang koheren yang menetapkan metric kepatuhan yang jelas dan dapat diprediksi, bukan sekadar peraturan tambal sulam yang berbeda antar negara dan menyulitkan operasi internasional.
Untuk meminimalisasi biaya kepatuhan – juga karena kelestarian lingkungan kini menjadi indikasi kompetitif utama bagi konsumen dan investor – maskapai akan mendorong negara yang menjadi mitra bisnisnya untuk ikut serta dalam program ICAO.
Perjanjian baru ini memberi peluang besar untuk mencegah pelepasan emisi sebanyak 2.5 miliar ton CO2  dalam 15 tahun pertama – setara dengan menghapuskan 35 juta mobil dari jalan setiap tahun pelaksanaan program ini.
Perjanjian tersebut juga merangsang produsen-produsen besar seperti Boeing, Airbus, Bombardier, dan Embraer – yang tengah berinvestasi pada pengembangan pesawat terbang yang lebih hemat bahan bakar dan peningkatan efisiensi pada model yang sudah ada – untuk mengembangkan teknologi bersih yang memungkinkan pembelian offset emisi yang lebih sedikit.
Meskipun demikian, kerangka yang diputuskan di Montreal belum lengkap dan segala rincian pentingnya harus diselesaikan dengan cepat agar maskapai bisa mulai merencanakan bagaimana perusahaannya akan memenuhi target lingkungan yang baru.
Negara-negara maju sudah menawarkan bantuan pelaksanaan GMBM, yang diharapkan akan membuka jalan bagi investasi di negara-negara berkembang yang merupakan pusat keunggulan penerbangan baru.
Apabila negara-negara tersebut bisa melampaui teknologi-teknologi lama, mereka akan menjadi pemimpin baru di sektor penerbangan yang bersifat smart-carbon.
Negara harus meraih peluang di hadapannya dan mengikuti kerangka ICAO agar setiap produsennya mempunyai pedoman arah yang jelas dan dapat diprediksi.
Pada pertemuan di Paris tahun lalu yang membahas perubahan iklim, kita menyaksikan kekuatan dari aksi kolektif global untuk melawan perubahan iklim.
Sekitar 187 negara – besar dan kecil, maju dan berkembang – mengumumkan target penurunan emisi nasional beberapa bulan sebelum konferensi diselenggarakan, sehingga sukses menciptakan momentum untuk meraih perjanjian yang bersejarah.
Melalui progres perjanjian Paris saat ini yang segera diberlakukan dalam hitungan bulan – lebih cepat daripada perkiraan banyak orang – kita masih memiliki momentum.
Perjanjian ICAO ialah gelombang lanjutan dalam perjuangan internasional melawan perubahan iklim.
Bersama, kedua perjanjian tersebut akan menaikkan peluang kita merealisasikan pertumbuhan ekonomi yang berkelanjutan dan tetap menjaga kelestarian lingkungan.
Melalui aksi membersihkan jejak karbon kita sejak hari ini, generasi para pelancong masa depan yang terbang di udara akan bisa menoleh ke luar jendela pesawatnya dan melihat bumi yang sehat.
Airpocalypse di Eropa
SINGAPURA – Para pembuat kebijakan di Eropa memang senang menceramahi negara lain tentang polusi udara.
Negara-negara di Asia, khususnya Tiongkok, menjadi target favorit penerima kritik mereka.
Bahkan rasa-rasanya konferensi berskala besar apapun yang membahas tentang lingkungan hidup belum lengkap jika tidak disertai presentasi oleh pembuat kebijakan dari Eropa tentang “praktik-praktik terbaik” di Eropa yang harus ditiru negara-negara lain.
Akan tetapi, bicara mengenai polusi udara, mungkin ada baiknya negara-negara Eropa lebih sedikit bicara dan lebih banyak mendengar.
Polusi udara menjadi semakin parah di kawasan Eropa.
Organisasi Kesehatan Dunia (WHO) menyebutnya “satu-satunya risiko kesehatan lingkungan hidup yang terbesar” dan memperkirakan 90% penduduk Eropa terpapar dengan polusi outdoor yang melebihi batas kualitas utama berdasarkan pedoman WHO.
Pada tahun 2010, sekitar 600.000 penduduk Eropa meninggal di usia muda karena polusi dalam ruangan (indoor) dan di luar ruangan (outdoor) dan kerugian ekonomi ditaksir mencapai $1.6 triliun, yakni sekitar 9% PDB Uni Eropa.
London dan Paris mengalami masalah kualitas udara buruk.
Tingkat nitrogen dioksida di sejumlah wilayah di London seringkali mencapai 2-3 kali di atas batas wajar yang disarankan.
Di UK saja, polusi udara membunuh sekitar 29,000 orang dalam setahun dan menempati peringkat kedua penyebab kematian di usia muda.
Paris bahkan mungkin lebih menderita; pada bulan Maret, setelah tingkat polusi udaranya melebihi Shanghai, pemerintah setempat lalu menetapkan larangan mengemudi secara parsial dan menggratiskan layanan transportasi publik.
Sayangnya, pembuat kebijakan di Eropa tidak terdorong untuk melakukan gerakan yang sama.
George Osborne, selaku Chancellor of the Exchequer pemerintah UK, menolak kepemimpinan Inggris dalam perjuangan melawan perubahan iklim.
“Kita tidak akan menyelamatkan bumi dengan menutup pabrik baja, fasilitas smelter aluminium, atau pabrik kertas,” jelasnya dalam pernyataan yang dibuat di tahun 2011.
George Osborne tidak sendirian.
Di saat para politisi Eropa berpendapat perlindungan lingkungan hidup akan melemahkan perekonomian Eropa yang sudah memburuk, tentu tidak mengejutkan bila upaya mengurangi polusi udara tidak berhasil.
Standar-standar yang mengatur emisi beracun dari pabrik batubara yang diperkenalkan Uni Eropa bahkan kalah ketat bila dibandingkan Tiongkok, menurut laporan Greenpeace.
Namun sejumlah politisi Eropa menyerukan kebijakan yang lebih longgar, sementara Hongaria menyarankan agar standar tersebut dihapuskan seluruhnya.
Memang benar bahwa tingkat polusi udara di Asia sangat mengkhawatirkan.
Di Benua Asia terdapat sembilan dari sepuluh negara dengan polusi terburuk, berdasarkan Peringkat Kualitas Udara yang diterbitkan Yale University pada tahun 2014 lalu.
New Delhi menempati posisi pertama kota dengan tingkat polusi tertinggi di dunia, dimana polusi udara mencapai 60 kali di atas batas aman.
Berkat udara yang tidak sehat di Beijing, perusahaan-perusahaan asing membayarkan “hardship bonus” kepada 30% karyawan yang bekerja di kota tersebut.
Namun setidaknya pembuat kebijakan di Asia sudah mengakuinya sebagai masalah dan mengambil tindakan untuk mengatasinya.
Tiongkok, misalnya menyerukan “perang melawan polusi.”
Hingga tahun  2017, Beijing – pernah disebut “Greyjing” oleh media internasional – akan mengeluarkan sekitar CN¥760 miliar ($121 miliar) guna melawan polusi udara.
Inti dari upaya Tiongkok adalah meningkatnya penggunaan transportasi publik, perdagangan hijau (green trade), dan penyempurnaan campuran energi (energy mix).
Pemerintah sudah menetapkan pendirian halte bus setiap 500 meter di pusat-pusat kota, menurunkan tarif hingga 5% atau lebih rendah bagi 54 produk ramah lingkungan, dan menonaktifkan pabrik-pabrik batubara yang sudah tua dan tidak efisien.
Porsi bahan bakar non-fosil dalam pemakaian energi primer diperkirakan bertambah menjadi 20% pada tahun 2030.
Besar kemungkinan semua target ini diterapkan dengan ketat, mengingat kuatnya dukungan politik dari pimpinan tertinggi.
Sementara itu di India, pemerintah negara bagian di Gujarat, Maharashtra, danTamil Nadu mencanangkan peresmian skema cap-and-trade untuk materi partikulat yang pertama di dunia.
Mahkamah Agung India bahkan mengusulkan pembebanan biaya ekstra terhadap kendaraan pribadi bermesin diesel di New Delhi.
Negara-negara lain di kawasan Asia juga mengambil tindakan untuk meningkatkan kualitas udara.
Vietnam berencana membangun delapan jalur kereta api perkotaan dalam beberapa tahun ke depan.
Kota Bangkok, yang sudah memerangi polusi udara sejak 1990an, menanam 400,000 pohon.
Jepang memberikan subsidi bagi mobil hidrogen dan membangun  beberapa kawasan baru yang khusus diperuntukkan bagi pejalan kaki.
Eropa, sebagai salah satu wilayah terkaya di dunia, selayaknya berada di baris terdepan dalam upaya menggalakkan keberlanjutan lingkungan hidup.
Namun begitu persoalannya menyangkut polusi udara, para pembuat kebijakan di Eropa harus berhenti menguliahi negara lain dan fokus menyelesaikan permasalahan mereka sendiri.
A Japanese Metamorphosis?
OSAKA – Yesterday’s landslide general-election victory by the Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ) terminated the one-party-dominated system that the catch-all Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) has controlled almost without interruption since 1955.
For most of the last decade, the DPJ was not seen as a viable alternative to the LDP, although they appeared to form a pseudo-two-party system.
Twenty years after the Cold War’s end, Japan will at last have a post-Cold War system of government.
The Japanese public, even now, remains uncertain about the DPJ’s ability to govern and is skeptical of its rosy programs of wealth redistribution, which lack solid funding.
The public is also fully aware that the ideologically fragmented DPJ lacks a pragmatic, coherent foreign and security policy
Yet the DPJ will form the next government because of public disgust with the LDP.
For the last four years, the LDP had shown itself to be utterly unresponsive to the key issues of popular concern: pensions, unemployment, and the fraying social safety net.
Moreover, the LDP was plagued by a string of minor scandals and consistent bungling.
The LDP’s need for three different prime ministers in the space of little more than a year made plain that the party’s power nucleus had melted down.
Once in power, the DPJ will immediately confront the massive bureaucracy and entrenched mandarins, which usually sabotage any efforts at administrative reform that threatens their power and vested interests.
Indeed, immediately after the election, the budget estimates for the next fiscal year are due.
The figures that will be presented are the result of a lengthy process, in which the bureaucracy closely consulted with LDP.
So, without breaking the regular budget cycle, the DPJ will be forced to implement not only the supplementary budget drawn up by the LDP, but will also be stuck with next year’s budget, which embodies LDP policies that the DPJ has denounced.
As a result, the DPJ has announced plans to revoke the LDP’s guidelines for a ceiling on budget requests so as to formulate its own budget from scratch.  It will also revise the supplementary budget as well.
But time is short, and few of new DPJ lawmakers possess the legislative experience and budgetary expertise to make that happen.
To gain control of the mandarins, the DPJ plans to place 100 lawmakers in the ministries’ top leadership, as well as three dozen political appointees to policy staffs in the office of the prime minister.
Unfortunately, the DPJ scrapped an LDP-sponsored civil-service reform bill, which would have allowed the DPJ to replace mandarins with an army of political appointees.
The DPJ, despite its manifesto, seems unprepared to tame the mandarins, and so may be forced to rely on them.
The ascendency of the mandarins is a legacy of Japan’s unique historical development dating back to its early modern period.
Unlike in Europe, Japan developed its state before building a strong civil society.
Indeed, full-fledged “society”-building started only after the 1868 Meiji Restoration, which tipped the balance of power definitively in favor of the state.
As a result, the mandarins survived WWII and the postwar American occupation relatively undamaged, and they will strive to survive the DPJ government as well.
They will most likely succeed.
LDP lawmakers and mandarins developed a routine in which mandarins drafted cabinet-sponsored bills, LDP lawmakers checked the bills, and the two together finalized legislative drafts before they were introduced to the Diet (parliament).
Since the LDP, recently with a coalition partner, controlled the Diet, the legislative process was simply the interaction between LDP lawmakers and mandarins, centered in the LDP’s headquarters.
The Diet’s role was merely pro forma.
Indeed, under the LDP-led one-party-dominant system, this extra-constitutional mechanism became an integral part of Japan’s government polity.
The DPJ government will collide head-on with the mandarins, partly because the party will find it hard to recruit sufficiently qualified policymakers.
The mandarins have maintained their privileged position in this regard, owing partly to the tax system, which prevents the emergence of non-profit institutions, especially think tanks, where independent policy expertise can be forged.
Moreover, perhaps in anticipation of a change in power, the mandarins have moved forward the annual personnel changes in the major ministries’ top administrative positions.
And what of the LDP?
Having fallen from power, it will lose its control of the redistribution of government funds.
Unable to pay off its constituencies, disintegration looms, for the LDP has never been a party with entrenched grass-roots support, but instead operates as a machine of power and redistribution through a web of insiders across the country’s industrial sectors, occupational associations, and local communities.
Only by recruiting new blood and reorganizing itself with a solid ideological platform will an LDP comeback be possible.
The DPJ has even weaker grass-roots support, so the mandarins will most likely use their standard techniques of divide and rule to cajole the party by teaching it to mimic the LDP in using state money and contracts to underwrite its major constituencies, such as labor unions and other interest groups.
The birth of the DPJ government can yet be a turning point.
A major power shift in favor of “society” has taken place.
If the DPJ can break free of mandarin control by centralizing policy formation in the office of the prime minister, as it intends, Japan can emerge as a more resilient democracy with a full-fledged two-party system and greater willingness to assume an international leadership role.
A Jobless Recovery?
CAMBRIDGE – Who will suffer the longest and the most from the implosion in 2008-2009 of Wall Street and the ensuing world recession?
Not the bankers and financiers who created the disaster.
Some financiers, like Bernard Madoff, will go to prison for fraud.
But, although Madoff was only the tip of the iceberg of rampant financial malfeasance, most suspect financiers need not fear arrest, either because their behavior merely skirted the law, or because financial impropriety more subtle than outright fraud is often difficult to prove.
Some bank bosses will retire in shame, but with huge payments to ease their pain – such as the $55 million golden parachute handed to Bank of America’s Ken Lewis, with his, and the £25 million pension bestowed on Royal Bank of Scotland’s Fred Godwin.
But, buoyed by government bailout money, guarantees, and low interest rates, many banks have again begun to pay their top managers huge bonuses while fighting vigorously against reforms designed to restrain their risk-taking and compensation.
The big losers from this economic disaster are workers in the advanced countries that bought into the laissez-faire flexibility of American-style capitalism.
From 2007 to October 2009, the United States lost nearly eight million jobs, which reduced the employment-population ratio from 63% to 58.5%.
The unemployment rate at the end of 2009 was above 10%, duration of joblessness was the longest since the Great Depression, millions had had their working hours cut, and millions more were too discouraged by a lack of jobs to seek work.
Advanced Europe, Canada, and Japan also suffered major job losses that will last for a long time.
Spain, which allows for widespread temporary contracts, has had the biggest increase in unemployment, because Spanish workers can be fired as quickly as those in the US.
Some countries – for example, Germany, Sweden, and South Korea – have “hidden” their joblessness by paying firms to keep workers on the payroll.
This can work in the short term, but it cannot be sustained over time.
From the 1980’s through the mid-2000’s, employment has increasingly lagged GDP in economic recoveries.
In the US, there was a jobless recovery under President Bill Clinton until the dot.com boom in the latter part of the 1990’s, and there was a jobless recovery under George W. Bush in the wake of the 2001 slowdown.
In the early 1990’s, Sweden suffered a huge recession precipitated by a housing bubble and a banking crisis.
Its unemployment rate rose from 1.8% in 1990 to 9.6% in 1994, before bottoming out at 5% in 2001.
Sixteen years after the crisis, the unemployment rate was 6.2% – more than triple the rate in 1990.
In 1997, Korea suffered not only from the Asian financial crisis, but also from insistence by the US and the International Monetary Fund that it raise interest rates and undertake “Washington Consensus”-style reforms to receive aid.
Employment recovered, but primarily in “non-regular” jobs with limited benefits, low wages, and little job security.
Inequality in Korea rose from moderate levels to second highest (behind the US) among advanced OECD countries.
Weakness in the job market takes a huge toll on economic and personal well-being.
Young people seeking their first jobs and experienced workers who lose jobs in a weak job market suffer economic losses that will last their entire lives.
Studies of happiness show that unemployment reduces happiness by as much as the loss of a family member.
It is difficult to see the US re-attaining full employment anytime soon.
From 1993 to 1998, the US created millions of jobs, which raised the employment rate by 5.4 percentage points.
If employment began rising at this rate in 2010, it would take until 2015 before it reached its pre-recession level.
And slow recovery in the US will drag down recovery in other advanced countries, reducing their employment as well.
A long, painful period of high unemployment runs counter to what most experts believed the flexible US economic model would ever produce.
From the early 1990’s on, many analysts viewed America’s weak unionization, at-will employment, limited legal job protection, and high job turnover as major factors in achieving a lower unemployment rate than most EU countries.
Many OECD countries initiated various kinds of flexibility reforms in the hope of improving their economies along US lines.
The view that flexibility is the key factor in employment is no longer tenable.
In its 2009 Employment Outlook , the OECD took a hard look at its favored policy reforms and found them deficient in helping countries adjust to a finance-driven recession.
According to the OECD, “there does not appear to be any strong reason to expect that recent structural reforms mean that OECD labor markets are now substantially less sensitive to severe economic downturns.”
So the lesson from the recession is clear.
The weak reed in capitalism is not the labor market, but the financial market.
At worst, labor-market failures impose modest inefficiency costs on society, whereas capital-market failures harm society greatly, with workers, rather than the perpetrators of financial disaster, suffering the most.
Moreover, globalization means that the US capital market’s failure spreads misery around the world.
We owe it to workers victimized by this recession to reinvent finance so that it works to enrich the real economy, instead of enriching only the financiers.
This means changing the incentives and rules that govern the financial sector.
Since other countries’ economies and jobs are also at stake, they owe it to their citizens to press the US to deliver meaningful financial reforms.
France’s Midsummer Night’s Dream
PARIS – Bastille Day, the French national holiday, was glorious this year.
The military parade, dominated by the celebration of “victory” in Mali and the joint participation of African and United Nations troops, had the perfection of a gracious, albeit muscular, ballet.
The classical concert that preceded the magisterial fireworks that ended the day was the closest thing to a French version of the Proms in London, mixing light classical and popular songs.
The Eiffel Tower imbued the evening with its magic.
Paris, in case anyone had any lingering doubts, remains the capital of the world – or so it seemed for a night.
The melancholia that began to seize France many years ago was all but forgotten.
The celebration of the glory of the past, mixed with popular English songs of the present, seemed to indicate renewed national confidence.
What was the meaning of this moment of grace?
Was it purely the product of a collective delusion, an emotional Potemkin village of sorts, encouraged, if not conceived, by the authorities to restore some level of self-assurance among France’s depressed citizens?
Even if the positive emotions remain only fleeting (as seems most likely), they were real and palpable.
The French seemed to be in the mood to celebrate.
Of course, it could simply have been the weather; a gorgeous summer has finally settled in after a miserable spring.
But it might also have been one of those natural turning points, a collective and spontaneous decision to say: “Enough of depression, let’s move on.”
We French may not be what we used to be, the celebrants seemed to be saying, but we are still much more than people think we are.
We have a great revolutionary past that still conveys universal values – liberty, equality, fraternity – and an army that, as in Mali, continues to make a difference in the world.
One can draw two lessons from this collective form of escapism.
The first is that, beyond the many layers of depression and distrust in France, there is potential for a new and collective departure.
This would require, of course, less cynical political elites who can transcend their petty ambitions and divisions for the sake of the country.
The second lesson, even more obvious, is that reality cannot be changed with a simple public spectacle.
France is not Imperial Rome, where panem et circenses made a fundamental difference.
It is a weakened democracy mired in an economic and social crisis so deep that it verges on becoming an identity crisis.
The proof was provided by a third traditional event on Bastille Day, between the morning’s military parade and the evening’s music and fireworks: President François Hollande’s speech to the nation, which took the form of an interview with two prominent journalists.
He, too, was in a reassuring mood.
According to Hollande, the economic upturn – la reprise – had just started, and hope was around the corner.
His tone and message had changed.
He was no longer the “normal man” of his election campaign and tenure until now; instead, he tried to present himself, like his predecessor, Nicolas Sarkozy, as a superhero.
Of course, given his personality and low public-approval ratings, his address was the least convincing event of the day.
Who could have said with certainty that the economic upturn announced by Hollande was real rather than aspirational?
Beyond his message’s wishful thinking, the public’s reaction to the messenger was a mixture of disbelief and indifference.
Seeing the behavior of friends, all French, listening with me to Hollande, I was reminded of another moment.
It was December 31, 1989, and I was in the Soviet Union.
I had found myself in a restaurant in the old city of Suzdal, listening to President Mikhail Gorbachev’s “New Year wishes.”
I was moved: The man who symbolized glasnost and perestroika, who had allowed the peaceful emancipation of most of Eastern and Central Europe, was speaking.
But I was alone in paying attention to him.
The restaurant’s customers, like my French friends now, could not have cared less.
Their president had become background noise.
Has Hollande become, in this sense, a French Gorbachev?
For the left and the Greens, he is close to being a traitor.
These voters chose him a year ago not only because he was not Sarkozy, but because he incarnated the values of the true left, even if his centrist moderation seemed a bad omen.
Voters of the center or even the center-right are disappointed, too, by their president’s lack of charisma, if not sheer incompetence.
After a year of Hollande, France is witnessing a fundamental political revolution.
During the half-century of the Fifth Republic, a bipartisan system of left and right has traditionally prevailed.
But now France is becoming a country dominated by a “tripartite system” of more or less equal strength: the left, the right, and the extreme right.
If France wants to capitalize on the positive emotions of Bastille Day, it needs much more responsible elites, ready to unite in the fight against unemployment and its causes (lack of competitiveness and labor-market rigidity) and consequences (the rise of populist, non-republican forces).
What Bastille Day revealed, even briefly and superficially, is that the potential to unite France exists.
But doing so requires more than shallow promises.
A Kick-Off for Peace?
Yerevan – Armenian President Serzh Sargsyan’s recent invitation to Turkish President Abdullah Gul to visit Yerevan to watch a football match together was historic.
Given the two countries’ long-strained relations, this visit would have been remarkable at any time.
But coming as it does only one month after the alarming Russian-Georgian confrontation, it may offer real hope that tensions in the volatile Caucasus region can be eased.
Of course, ancient and difficult issues divide Armenia and Turkey.
But now is the moment for both countries to put the past aside in order to address their common security concerns.
In the new context set by the war in Georgia, the urgency of Turkey becoming a real bridge between the nations of the Caucasus is not lost on anyone.
This expectation is an inevitable consequence of Turkey’s geography and history.
Situated figuratively between modernity and tradition, secularism and Islam, and democracy and tyranny, Turkey also is an actual physical bridge between East and West.
For the peoples of the Caucasus, Turkey marks our path to Europe.
It is a NATO member, bordering the three Caucasus republics that have NATO Individual Partnership Action Programs.
It aspires to join the European Union, and would bring the EU to our three borders, even as we, too, aspire to join one day.
Indeed, Turkey has never missed an opportunity to present itself as a regional broker.
Immediately after the collapse of the Soviet Union, Turkey proposed the Black Sea Economic Cooperation.
This year, as the American-led effort to mediate a Middle East peace settlement began to falter, Turkey took up the job of mediator in both the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the conflict between Syria and Israel.
Now, in the immediate wake of the Russia-Georgia crisis, Turkey’s leaders have stepped forward once again to take a leadership role in the Caucasus.
The world must fervently hope that the Turkish proposal for a Caucasus Stability and Cooperation Platform is more serious and sustained than previous similar efforts.
But, in order to succeed, Turkey must firmly pursue a pledge from all the region’s players to repudiate the use of force in settling their disputes.
If this pledge is adopted and respected, conflicts in the region will be viewed in a wholly different, more tolerant context, marking a historic breakthrough to peace.
In fact, why not take the idea of such a pact one step further?
We in this region can, and I believe should, call for a non-aligned Caucasus, free of security blocs and adversarial alliances.
After all, security alliances and guarantees only create dividing lines, with their attendant security challenges.
Our countries and peoples have, throughout history, lived under a common umbrella for far longer than we have been divided.
Today, we share a common vision of European integration, and it is in this broader context that our conflicts should be resolved.
French President Nicolas Sarkozy’s and German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s visits to Georgia and Russia proved that there is no substitute for Europe insofar as the Caucasus is concerned.
Only Europe can play the role of honest broker in the region’s atmosphere of suspicion and intolerance.
But, at the end of the day, we ourselves must be willing to work toward a region of peace and cooperation.
The Caucasus is too small a space for closed borders and explosive conflicts.
Although some of those tensions appear purely bilateral, the Georgian-Russian conflict demonstrates that there is no such thing anymore in this globalized world, and certainly not in this interconnected region.
In fact, real peace in the Caucasus requires two key strategic transformations.
One is a lesson from history: Russia’s strategic interests here cannot be ignored.
To believe and behave otherwise would lead to regional chaos.
The other lesson is that Turkey and Armenia cannot remain adversaries forever.
There must be normalization in our relations in order for the Caucasus to coalesce into a functional region.
Ironically, both Russia and the United States recognize that this is in their interest.
The Russians view normal relations between Turkey and Armenia as a way to minimize Georgia’s strategic role in the region.
The US views an opening to Turkey as a way to decrease Armenia’s real and imagined reliance on Russia.
Beyond the emotional impact of President Gul’s visit to Yerevan, real improvement in Turkish-Armenian relations requires opening the two countries’ closed border – the last in Europe.
Or, for a start, the existing railroad link between the two countries could be made operational.
If this does not happen within the coming weeks and months, then Turkey will have demonstrated that all this was just a show.
President Gul’s visit does mark a watershed – either as a failure to make history, or as the beginning of a new era.
Truth and Consequences
NEW YORK – The recent re-election of Colombia’s president, Juan Manuel Santos, brings hope to a country seeking to end a half-century of conflict.
But, as with so many peace processes, finding a balance between creating a stable accord and acknowledging the terrible injustices that occurred during the conflict can be difficult to achieve.
Many countries and communities, from Nepal to Northern Ireland, have grappled with legacies of ethnic, ideological, or religious division and violence, often with limited success.
This is frequently the case because the mechanisms established to cope with post-conflict reconciliation, truth, and justice, have proved inadequate.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) has made important contributions to truth seeking.
But victims complain that its procedures are slow and abstruse; and many Bosnian Serbs are convinced that the tribunal is selective and politically motivated.
An agreement between Nepal’s government and Maoist guerrillas to establish a truth commission and investigate the “disappeared” was delayed for seven years.
When legislators finally enacted the enabling legislation in May 2013, victims were dismayed to discover that the commission would be allowed to recommend amnesties for crimes against humanity, in contravention of international principles and United Nations guidelines.
In Northern Ireland, the Good Friday Agreement, justly acclaimed for staunching the bloodshed and starting reconciliation, has – to the great frustration of victims – run into political resistance over one integral element of the peace process: the establishment of mechanisms to clarify past crimes.
Peace negotiators understandably fear that criminal accountability for past crimes will threaten their side’s leaders and supporters.
Many have wrongly assumed – based on a misinterpretation of the South African experience – that truth commissions provide a “soft” alternative to justice.
As a result, they have willingly incorporated these mechanisms into peace agreements (conveniently ignoring the fact that the victims are forced to choose between seeking justice and learning the truth).
Predictably, as truth commissions have become established components of transitional justice, former fighters have become increasingly worried that their reputations and political credibility could be on the line should past crimes ever come to light.
Seeking the truth can be unsettling and painful for anyone, but it comes with serious consequences for those with reason to fear justice.
Indeed, conflict mediation and transitional justice rely on truth commissions as a fundamental building block of peace not because such commissions provide impunity for the worst crimes; on the contrary, they reinforce comprehensive rights-based policies and access to justice.
As a recent symposium, organized by the Kofi Annan Foundation and the International Center for Transitional Justice, concluded, truth commissions contribute most to peace by reasserting the rule of law, recognizing victims, and supporting institutional reform.
But, in order to succeed, these commissions must be effective, independent, and legitimate.
Half-measures will not do.
Truth commissions therefore should never be established as “box-ticking” exercises to assuage local public opinion or the international community, as witnessed in Nepal.
Even when broad mandates and functions are established with the best of intentions, truth commissions are often deprived of the necessary resources, leading to further frustration and disillusion.
Moreover, a commission should not be led or staffed by individuals of questionable integrity, thereby undermining the legitimacy of the process.
Above all, truth commissions must be adapted to a country’s particular circumstances.
As we have seen in Bosnia, Colombia, Nepal, Northern Ireland, and elsewhere, the nature of conflicts and how they are resolved differ widely; so should their respective commissions.
A “one-size-fits-all” solution ends up fitting no one.
It is vital that the details of each case of post-conflict transitional justice are understood and implemented.
It is all too easy for political leaders to ignore victims or suppress the truth in their quest for a peace deal.
But recognizing victims’ rights is an indispensable condition for lasting peace.
Human suffering and victims’ dignity are too powerful to be erased by others’ political pacts.
Eventually, the past demands its due: justice is not just an ideal; it is an investment in a better future.
Alan Greenspan on Trial
The release of Alan Greenspan’s ghostwritten memoirs The Age of Turbulence has elicited charges that he was not such a great central banker after all.
Stan Collender of National Journal sees the fingerprints of the White House on these attacks: Greenspan is harshly critical of George W. Bush’s administration, after all, and to attack the credibility of Republican ex-policymakers who are critical of Bush is standard counterpunching for it.
He says that he did not understand how the growth of non-standard mortgages had lured borrowers and investors into bearing dangerous risks.
He was, he now says, focusing on how fixed-rate mortgages are relatively bad deals for borrowers in times of low inflation, which was a mistake.
Greenspan also pleads guilty to a mistake in early 2001.
He thought that he was giving balanced testimony to Congress on government budget issues.
He testified that it is important to run surpluses to pay down the debt, but that surpluses must not be so large that the government winds up owning American industry.
He also testified that tax cuts are better than spending increases to keep surpluses from growing too large, but that uncertainty is enormous, so that any tax cuts should be canceled if they threatened to bring us back to an age of deficits.
Robert Rubin and Kent Conrad warned him that the press would not interpret his testimony as being balanced, and that Congress would interpret it as an excuse to abandon fiscal discipline.
They were right.
Greenspan also pleads guilty to misunderstanding the character of the Bush administration.
He thought that his old reality-based friends from the Ford administration were back in power.
He thought that he – and Treasury Secretary Paul O’Neill – could win the quiet “inside game” for sensible policy without resorting to an “outside game” that would make his reappointment in 2004 unlikely.
He was wrong.
But how serious are these policy-political crimes to which Greenspan now pleads guilty?
In my view, they are misdemeanors.
Against them you have to set what former Treasury Secretary Larry Summers calls Greenspan’s “golden glove” performance at avoiding and minimizing recessions during his years at the Fed.
The “felonies” of which Greenspan stands accused are the other two charges: that he should have done more to stop the stock market bubble of the late 1990’s, and that he should have done more to stop the housing bubble of the early 2000’s.
Here, Greenspan holds his ground, and pleads not guilty.
The only way, he says, for the Fed to have kept stock prices in reasonable equilibrium ranges in the late 1990’s would have been to raise interest rates so high that they hit the real economy on the head with a brick.
Interest rates high enough to curb stock market speculation would also have curbed construction and other forms of investment, raised unemployment, and sent the economy into recession.
To cause a significant current evil in order to avoid a possible future danger when our knowledge is limited and our judgments uncertain is, Greenspan believes, unwise.
In this, he is following a tradition of caution that extends from Edmund Burke to John Maynard Keynes.
Greenspan mounts a similar defense concerning the housing bubble.
High construction employment has been good for American workers in the past half-decade – a period that has not produced much good for them.
Higher interest rates to reduce the housing boom seem, even in retrospect, ill advised if the cost is mass unemployment.
And Greenspan eschews paternalism: he would not assume the role of a regulator telling people that they cannot buy a house even though a lender is willing to finance it.
But Greenspan would have served the country and the world better if he had been somewhat more paternalist in slowing the growth of non-standard adjustable-rate mortgages.
He would have served the country and the world better had he been less of a loyal Republican working the inside game of trying to convince Bush’s political advisors that good policy was important, and more of a nonpartisan steward of America’s long-term fiscal stability.
Of course, such a Greenspan would never have been re-appointed.
All in all, Greenspan served the United States and the world well through his stewardship of monetary policy, especially by what he did not do: trying to stop stock and housing speculation by halting the economy in its tracks.
A Lasting Poison
NEW YORK – Next year will mark the twentieth anniversary of the collapse of communism in Europe.
Liberated from the complexity of knowing too much about the cruel past, the young people of Eastern Europe’s post-communist generation seem uninterested in what their parents and grandparents endured.
Yet the recent revelation of the Czech writer Milan Kundera’s presumed complicity in the face of Stalinism is but the latest of the long half-life of a toxic past.
Other examples come to mind: the accusations of collaboration with the secret police raised against Lech Walesa, Romania’s public controversies surrounding Mircea Eliade’s fascist past, and the attacks on the alleged “Jewish monopoly of suffering” which equate the Holocaust with the Soviet Gulag.
Friedrich Nietzsche said that if you look in the eye of the Devil for too long, you risk becoming a devil yourself.
A Bolshevik anticommunism, similar in its dogmatism to communism itself, has from time to time run riot in parts of Eastern Europe.
In country after country, that Manichean mindset, with its oversimplifications and manipulations, was merely re-fashioned to serve the new people in power. 
Opportunism has had its share in this, of course.
In 1945, when the Red Army occupied Romania, the Communist Party had no more than 1,000 members; in 1989, it had almost four million.
One day after Nicolae Ceausescu’s execution, most of these people suddenly became fierce anticommunists and victims of the system they had served for decades.
Residual traces of totalitarian thinking can also be found in the hostility to former dissidents like Adam Michnik or Václav Havel, both of whom argued that the new democracies should not exploit resentments or seek revenge, as the totalitarian state did, but instead build a new national consensus to structure and empower a genuine civil society.
Former generals of the secret police and members of the Communist
But the case of Kundera appears different – though no less disturbing.
In 1950, Kundera, then a 20-year-old Communist, reportedly denounced to the criminal police as a Western spy a man he had never met – a friend of his friend’s girlfriend.
The man was later brutally interrogated in a former Gestapo torture facility and spent 14 years in prison.
Kundera’s name was contained in the investigating officer’s report, which was authenticated after a respected historian discovered it in a dusty Prague archive.
The reclusive Kundera, who immigrated to Paris in 1975, has declared that “it never happened.”
Moreover, Czechoslovakia’s fearsome secret police, who had every interest in silencing or compromising the famous dissident writer, never used the incident to blackmail or expose him.
Until more information is forthcoming, both from Kundera and from the authorities, the case will not be solved “beyond reasonable doubt.”
But
As far as we know, Kundera never was an informer before or after this incident, and we cannot ignore that he later freed himself from the compulsory totalitarian happiness that communism propagated.
Indeed, his case also serves as a reminder that the early 1950’s was the most brutal period of “proletarian dictatorship” in Eastern Europe – a period of great enthusiasm and terrible fear that poisoned the minds and souls of devoted believers, fierce opponents, and apathetic bystanders alike.
Moreover, Kundera’s case is hardly unique.
In 2006, the Nobel Prize-winning German author Günter Grass’s disclosed that, 60 years earlier, he was, as a teenager, a member of the Waffen-SS.
Similarly, a few years ago, the world was shocked to learn that famous Italian writer Ignazio Silone had, in his youth, collaborated with the fascist police.
Daily life under totalitarianism, be it communist or fascist, was routinely based on a deep duplicity whose effects are longstanding.
I don’t agree with those who say we should not be interested in the dark episodes in the life of a great writer.
Why not?
We should be interested not for prosecutorial purposes, but in order to gain a more profound understanding of a bloody, demagogical, and tyrannical Utopia – and of human weakness and vulnerability. We may even consider it a rewarding testament to an artist’s ability to overcome his past mistakes and still produce priceless work. 
But can we justifiably defend morally compromised artists and intellectuals on the basis of their work’s merit, yet condemn ordinary people for often less grave offenses?
An egregious example of this was the way followers of Romanian philosopher Constantin Noica defended his support for the fascist Iron Guard and his later collaboration with the Communists, while at the same time condemning even a generic cleaning woman for mopping the floors in the offices of the secret police.
Shouldn’t that cleaner’s drudgery to support her family, children, and her own survival be taken equally into account?
Life under totalitarianism was an extreme situation that requires us to apply special, nuanced rules to all the captives of that ordeal.
In order to understand that epoch, we have to know and carefully judge often ambiguous and overwhelming circumstances, never simplifying a multilayered daily reality for the sake of current political goals.
If nothing else, in order to forgive, we have to know what we are forgiving.
In Eastern Europe today, old and young alike stand to benefit from that lesson.
Moses wandered with his people in the desert for 40 years, until they had rid themselves of the poisonous slave mentality.
India’s Prohibition Hypocrisy
NEW DELHI – Last month, 18 people in the Gopalganj district of India’s Bihar state died after consuming illicit alcohol, highlighting – once again – the peculiar relationship between morality and tragedy in India.
The victims were poisoned because this April, in a fit of moralism, Bihar adopted a draconian law prohibiting the sale, possession, and consumption of alcohol.
It is far from the first such ban that has ended badly.
In a country where the national hero is the saintly Mahatma Gandhi, who considered alcohol an unmitigated evil, drinking has always carried a whiff of disrepute.
India’s constitution, in its non-enforceable Directive Principles, urges Indians to work toward prohibition, and the government does not serve alcohol even at state banquets and official receptions.
Four out of 29 Indian states (Bihar, Gujarat, Manipur, and Nagaland) and one union territory (Lakshadweep or the Laccadive Islands) are currently attempting to enforce total prohibition.
But maintaining a sweeping prohibition policy has long proved difficult in India.
In Manipur in 2002, the 1991 ban was lifted in five hill districts, where alcohol consumption is a centuries-old local tradition.
Lakshadweep makes an exception for an uninhabited island, where a tourist resort is allowed to operate a bar.
When I was a child, what was then Bombay excused anyone with a doctor’s note confirming alcoholism.
(Well-heeled executives tripped over themselves to be labeled alcoholics.)
The state that best illustrates the appeal and the pitfalls of such moralism is Kerala, which announced in 2014 that it was implementing a partial ban on the sale of alcohol, with the goal of achieving total prohibition in ten years.
It has been backsliding ever since.
A coastal state, Kerala has long been viewed as a tourist paradise – a reputation no doubt kept afloat on a sea of easily available libations.
Before the ban, Kerala held a somewhat dubious distinction: India’s highest per capita consumption of spirits.
But in India, where prohibition is popular among many segments of the electorate, politicians find it particularly difficult to resist the self-righteous urge to improve their fellow citizens.
So Kerala’s government introduced the ban.
And, at first, many approved.
The influential Christian churches applauded the move, as did the Christian-affiliated political parties.
Kerala’s Muslim leadership, including the then-ruling coalition’s ally, the Indian Union Muslim League, was equally vocal in its support.
Working-class women, tired of watching their laborer husbands blow their monthly wages on booze, also welcomed the decision, as did traditionalists, Gandhians, and other moralists, of which India has an abundance.
No public figure of any consequence in Kerala stood up to oppose the decision.
Any politician who might have been inclined to do so knew that they would be instantly tarred as a votary of evil alcohol, an agent of the “liquor mafia,” a bar-loving enemy of good, wholesome Gandhian values.
But there were good reasons to oppose the ban – reasons that had nothing to do with religion, morality, or alcoholism.
Excise duties on liquor account for 22% of the state revenues that sustain generous welfare programs in Kerala, which boasts the best social development indicators in India.
Another 26% of state revenues come from tourism, which would surely also take a hit.
Furthermore, much of Kerala’s economic viability depends on dynamic knowledge and services sectors.
Attracting talent and investment from abroad would become much more difficult if prohibition hampered the state’s quality of life.
(IT professionals in Bangalore, in the neighboring state Karnataka, flock to that city’s bars and pubs after long hours at work.)
Kerala’s leaders should have known that their state could not afford to do without widely available, heavily taxed liquor.
But they began to implement the policy anyway.
Almost immediately, 20,000 bar workers and distillery employees lost their jobs, in a state that already struggles with high unemployment.
Tourism operators were stung by cancelations, as would-be visitors decided to visit Sri Lanka or Goa instead; 50% of existing convention bookings were canceled.
And IT companies contemplating moving to clean, green, tech-friendly Kerala expressed concern about the prohibition policy.
It was not long before Kerala’s government decided that prohibition would apply only to hard alcohol, and closed bars could reopen as wine and beer parlors.
But that was not enough to save the government in June’s state election, which produced a new communist administration that, advocating education about the evils of alcohol instead of a ban, has promised to review the prohibition policy.
So Kerala is no longer hurtling toward disaster in the name of saving people from themselves.
But it never should have gone as far as it did, given experience with prohibition in other states, where falling revenues and rising crime (including smuggling, tax evasion, and illicit liquor production) forced its revocation.
Four states – Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, Mizoram, and Tamil Nadu – have repealed prohibition policies.
To be sure, not everyone loses out from a prohibition policy.
When Kerala first announced its plans, neighboring Tamil Nadu’s alcoholic beverages corporation, TASMAC, promptly declared its intention to open a string of new outlets along the states’ border, to cater to the demands of Keralite consumers.
In other words, excise duties from Kerala would now fill Tamil Nadu’s coffers.
Banning alcohol in India has been economically devastating.
Yet politicians continue to use the promise of prohibition to win votes.
When elections were called in Tamil Nadu early this year, its chief minister declared herself in favor of prohibition.
After the election was won, however, all such talk discreetly subsided.
My late father liked to say: “India is not only the world’s largest democracy; we are also the world’s largest hypocrisy.”
I suppose we can drink to that.
Leaders for a Leaderless World
PARIS – The newspaper commentaries that I write often have a dark perspective.
Sadly, this one will be no different.
But there are two pieces of good news that break through the gloom.
First, the global significance of US President Barack Obama’s reelection is clear: the world has escaped a disaster for international cooperation.
The US was on the verge of sinking into isolationist nationalism, reinforced, perhaps, by xenophobic sentiment.
Obama’s victory, despite America’s economic travails, clears the way for cooperation based on a sympathetic ear to others and on negotiations in which the US does not deny the legitimacy of a global public interest (as it has done, unfortunately, on the issue of climate change).
The other piece of good news concerns France, and thus is more “local,” but is crucially important nonetheless.
Like everywhere else in the developed world, the global crisis has hit the French economy hard, with output stagnating, unemployment rising, job insecurity mounting, government debt soaring, and the stock market at risk of crashing.
Manufacturing production has plummeted, the trade balance has deteriorated sharply, and corporate bankruptcies are increasingly frequent.
For six months, France has had new leadership – a new president, government, and parliament.
But President François Hollande and his government were strangely inactive after the elections, limiting themselves to reducing the impact of unfair budget cuts and taxation reforms implemented by the previous government of Nicolas Sarkozy.
Many began to wonder whether Hollande was aware of the scope of the crisis that the recent downturn might trigger.
In recent weeks, however, the government has introduced energetic and courageous measures to boost the competitiveness of French industries, including a huge €20 billion ($26 billion) tax break for businesses, to be financed by a hike in value-added tax, which means that the general public will pay for it.
The VAT increase will hurt, but there was no other way.
Awareness, boldness, and comprehensive policymaking have come as a relief to French investors, and have left them better positioned to face the crisis.
The French government’s new push to confront the country’s economic plight matters not only to France, but to Europe and the world as well.
After all, France is the eurozone’s second-largest economy, and the fifth-largest economy in the world.
And yet, despite these bright spots, international cooperation on issues ranging from regional conflicts to the protection of global public goods remains weak.
Antarctica, the only land in the world that is administered directly by the international community, is a recent case in point.
The Antarctic Treaty, negotiated in 1959, prohibits any and all military activities in Antarctica and forbids the establishment of any borders.
Three agreements – the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (1972), the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR, 1980), and the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty (PEP, 1991), which prohibits any activity relating to mineral resources – have since been added to the treaty.
The Antarctic Treaty System includes three annual meetings: one deals with the supervision and management of the Treaty itself, and the other two concern the CCAMLR and the PEP.
In recent years, proposals have been considered that would establish marine reserves around the continent and end the risk of growing scarcity, or the outright disappearance, of a variety of species of fish and cetaceans.
The principle that international cooperation is required to protect fishery resources, which are dwindling everywhere, was adopted at the 2011 CCAMLR meeting.
At the 2012 CCAMLR meeting, which concluded at the beginning of November in Hobart, Australia, three proposals (from the US, New Zealand, and France/Australia) to establish marine reserves in three different areas were discussed.
They were compatible and would reinforce one another.
Yet the discussion foundered, and no decision was taken.
Russia and Ukraine – and, to a lesser extent, China – blocked efforts to reach an agreement.
This failure reflects the same dynamic at work in the breakdown of global climate-change conferences in recent years: a few cynical countries, whose cooperation is needed to save the planet, fuel the madness of those bent on destroying it.
That will not change until a new consciousness emerges worldwide to persuade states to support binding international law.
The US has now reelected a president who understands this.
France has a president who understands the need for bold, far-reaching actions as well.
Their active leadership, and that of others, is needed now more than ever to turn the tide.
Assured Mutual Dependence
LONDON – During the Cold War, the certainty of “mutually assured destruction” steered the nuclear arms race away from catastrophe: a would-be attacker would face immediate retaliation, inevitably ending in both sides’ annihilation.
Today, a very different race is taking place – a race for the earth’s vital resources, and it threatens to undermine stability in key regions of the world.
The growing dependence of countries on one another’s food, water, and energy requires that the global response to sustainability is taken to the highest political level.
Unlike the nuclear arms race of the twentieth century, the resource-security agenda is not linear.
Mutually assured destruction was explicitly acknowledged during the Cold War in statements from both sides.
In the race for resources that defines the twenty-first century, no actor is directly or indirectly threatening other players to curtail food or energy exports, but all bear the systemic risks.
Countries have become unavoidably interdependent, and climate change, water stress, and the loss of ecological resilience all increase the volatility of this mutual dependence.
In a world of limited and scarce resources, countries and companies will be forced to make decisions that affect one another’s security.
In order to navigate this interdependence, the Earth Security Index 2014, produced by the Earth Security Initiative, shows countries’ combined vulnerabilities that might increase the risk exposure of governments and companies, unless more strategic approaches and sustainable investments are put in place.
The ESI identifies four areas of mutual dependence that will likely shape global security in the coming decades:
·         Choke points.
Countries’ growing demand for energy, water, food, and land cannot be satisfied without incurring tradeoffs among limited available resources.
Choke points are reached when the available resources are insufficient to satisfy demand.
In China and India, for example, this means that in certain regions there may not be enough water in the short term to run coal-fired thermal power stations and irrigate large fields to grow crops.
In China, 60% of planned coal-fired power plants will be built in water-stressed regions.
·         Food.
The growing dependence of many countries on food, water, and energy imports creates new opportunities for trade and investment, but it also exposes countries to critical vulnerabilities.
Australia, for example, is a large coal exporter but imports most of its refined fuels and holds just three days of fuel stockpiles.
The challenges of mutual dependence are particularly acute with respect to food.
As the ESI shows, some countries – including Egypt, Peru, and the United Arab Emirates – are heavily dependent on cereal imports from a small number of suppliers.
Moreover, grain suppliers’ exposure to extreme weather may compromise their ability to sustain supplies, with knock-on effects for import-dependent countries.
In 2010, for example, Russia imposed an export ban on wheat, following a severe drought.
The resulting food-price increases are believed to have played a role in Egypt’s revolution.
·         Teleconnections.
Anticipating systemic ecological risks will be increasingly important for sectors such as reinsurance and infrastructure investments.
“Teleconnections” refer to weather events that are related to one another over large geographic distances.
They are well known to science but not properly discussed by the industries, investors, and governments whose security depends on environmental stability.
For example, tropical rainforests play a crucial function in maintaining stable weather and rainfall, acting as a “pump” that helps moisture travel between different regions.
Deforestation can thus have a destabilizing effect on weather patterns, amplifying the frequency and severity of extreme events such as floods and droughts.
The resulting liabilities to key industries and the financial sector are clear.
In Brazil, for example, deforestation in Amazonia has slowed significantly over the last five years, but Brazil has already lost more than 11 million hectares of rainforest; its exposure to extreme weather has also steadily risen, with floods causing $4.7 billion in losses in 2011 alone.
In some regions of India, for example, these issues are playing out in tandem.
Insecure land tenure acts as a disincentive for smallholder farmers to commit to productivity-enhancing investments; water extraction rates are depleting aquifers as a result of permissive policies; and food security remains out of reach for millions of people, despite rapid economic growth in urban areas.
Countries and companies will increasingly need to invest in sustainable land in order to hedge their resource risks.
In 2015, global frameworks are due to be agreed to address climate change, coordinate responses to natural disasters, and guide the world’s development agenda.
Some of these multilateral processes – in particular, those seeking an ambitious global climate agreement – appear to be moving in slow motion and against the grain of geopolitical interests.
In the past, the case for high-level nuclear governance was urgent and clear, but required processes for creating a common understanding of risks and opportunities across national borders.
Successful multilateral responses, like the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, continue to be supported by more flexible global platforms, such as the Nuclear Threat Initiative, based on relationships and trust established outside the box of formal multilateralism.
This year, as world leaders discuss the next generation of sustainability, development, and climate frameworks, they will need to put their security and mutual dependence at the heart of the responses.
Here, too, the world will need to create informal platforms that supplement traditional multilateralism.
In particular, the outdated divisions between rich and poor countries and their responsibilities must be revised.
As new powers like China, Brazil, India, and other G-20 economies bid to reform global governance systems, their vulnerability to resource security must invigorate these processes.
Only then will the world be on track to improve the security of all.
After Aleppo
DENVER – The end of the fighting in Aleppo will not end the Syrian war, despite the countrywide ceasefire that has just been agreed.
Nor will it ease the suffering of the city’s population, much of which has been displaced.
What the Aleppo siege will do is clinch Syria’s place in history as, to borrow former US Secretary of State Warren Christopher’s phrase, another “problem from hell.”
And, like other hellish recent regional conflicts, such as those in Bosnia (to which Christopher was referring) and Rwanda, future historians will emphasize a crucial feature of the Syria conflict: the spectacular diplomatic failures that enabled it to escalate.
Good diplomacy begins with a keen analysis of interests, both of the country in question and of relevant external powers.
It demands a careful assessment of how the pursuit of those interests will affect the regional and international order.
And it seeks ways to strengthen the capacity of regional or world powers to help solve problems.
Throughout this process, universally shared and consistently reinforced values – both critical in getting disparate actors to work together to resolve problems and challenges – must provide a moral compass and common ground for action.
The key is to ensure that values do not become weapons, deployed by one actor against another in a way that exacerbates tensions and undermines solutions.
Consider the 1990s Bosnian War – the result of unfinished business from the breakup of the Austrian and Ottoman empires and the creation of nation-states earlier in the twentieth century.
The conflict erupted in the immediate aftermath of the Cold War, at a moment when one set of international organizing principles had collapsed and a new set had not yet been created.
Partly as a result of this, the conflict was characterized by large-scale civilian carnage and human-rights violations.
But, as a test for the new world order, the Bosnian War ended up catalyzing change in the international community’s institutional structure (including the establishment of war crimes tribunals).
Could the nascent post-Cold War system handle the inchoate problems of the former Soviet Union?
Could NATO take on new roles and missions?
Could the West work with the new Russian Federation?
Could the transatlantic relationship weather the storm?
The answer to all of these questions turned out to be yes.
As a result, though the region continues to be beset by serious problems, the gates of hell have remained closed – as they have in Rwanda.
And yet, just 20 years later, it seems that the world’s collective memory of how to cooperate has failed.
To be sure, there was never a clear path to peace in Syria.
President Bashar al-Assad, whose forces now control all of Aleppo for the first time since 2012, is a brutal dictator who has waged war on his own people, including civilians, and has even used chemical weapons.
The temptation to seek regime change – a goal embraced by the United States and some European countries – was understandable.
Yet, in a display of spectacularly incompetent diplomacy, the US set about pursuing that goal without any serious effort to marshal international support, or even to take stock of other opinions or interests.
And make no mistake: there are a lot of (often conflicting) opinions and interests.
After all, Syria is strategically perched on the Mediterranean; shares borders with Israel, Jordan, Turkey, and Iraq; and, like Iraq, has its own restive Kurdish minority.
It is not the kind of country to which international and regional powers would be indifferent.
In fact, when Western powers called for regime change, other actors – including Iran, Russia, and Shia interests in neighboring Lebanon – objected.
Nonetheless, the US soldiered on with its own poorly formulated agenda, supplying weapons to virtually unknown combatants on the ground before properly vetting them.
That gave the Assad regime’s allies all the justification they needed to supply weapons of their own.
Some argue that, if the US had just provided more weapons sooner, Assad would not have had time to galvanize support and hold onto power.
But that neglects the strategic importance of Syria to so many external powers, as well as the fragmentation and unpredictability of the US-based combatants.
America’s real mistake was failing to engage with all sides, including Assad and the Sunni opposition, which it deemed sectarian.
(During the Bosnian War, by contrast, the US talked to rump Yugoslavia’s ruler, Slobodan Milošević.)
With that narrow-minded approach – reflected in the lack of any articulated vision for a post-war Syria – the US effectively handed the diplomatic reins over to Russia.
Now, the US is essentially playing the role of agitator, offering little more than displays of moral outrage and stale references to a stillborn Geneva process.
Reacting to the carnage in Aleppo, Samantha Power, the US ambassador to the United Nations, was reduced to demanding of Assad’s Russian ally, “Are you truly incapable of shame?”
Meanwhile, the conflict rages on, with severe spillover effects on US allies like the European Union.
As for Russia, it, too, is pursuing a version of diplomacy that utterly lacks inclusiveness.
It is working with Turkey (a NATO member that seems increasingly lost at sea) to bring the Syrian opposition and representatives of the Assad government together in Kazakhstan for a new series of peace talks, facilitated by the ceasefire, of which Russia and Turkey are guarantors.
Iran will be there.
But where are the Sunni Arab states?
More important, where is the US?
It is often observed that, every four years, the US does without a foreign policy.
This time, it seems to have gotten an early start.
A Less-is-More Growth Strategy for Africa
REYKJAVIK – If African countries were to adopt only one policy to boost economic growth and improve macroeconomic stability, they should reduce the number of currencies in circulation across the continent as quickly as possible. Doing so would most likely encourage trade, as happened in Europe with the arrival of the euro, and could help contain inflation – which is always good for growth – by imposing international discipline on monetary policy.
The African Union is now aiming at pooling all the continent’s currencies into a single currency by 2028.
In the meantime, several regional monetary unions are on the drawing board, in addition to the two monetary unions that already exist, one
The premier and oldest of these unions is composed of the fourteen countries that belong to the Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa and the West African Economic and Monetary Union, which both use the CFA franc.
The second of these unions is composed of Lesotho, Namibia, Swaziland, and now Zimbabwe, all of which use the South African rand. Disregarding Zimbabwe, a recent and incomplete convert, the 18 countries of the two existing monetary unions have, as intended, benefited from lower inflation than much of the rest of Africa.
To see why, consider Nigeria. Before independence, Nigeria’s legal tender was the British pound.
The thinking behind the new arrangement was that an independent and flexible monetary policy would serve the nation‘s interest better than a fixed exchange rate that tied the naira to the pound.
But the naira’s introduction quickly put an end to parity with the British pound. Government expenditure exceeded federal revenue, despite rapidly rising foreign-exchange earnings from oil exports after 1970.
The federal government’s budget deficits were financed through foreign and domestic borrowing, and by printing money, which led to inflation and depreciation of the new currency. Today, it costs 220 naira to buy one British pound, which implies 15% annual average depreciation since 1973.
This depreciation would perhaps be justifiable had Nigeria managed to use easy money to narrow the gap between ordinary Nigerians’ standard of living and that of people living in Britain.
But that did not happen.
The purchasing power of national income per person in Nigeria is now 50% lower relative to Britain than in 1980.
In view of this experience, Nigeria now plans to abolish the naira in favor of joining a monetary union with four or five other West African countries (The Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Sierra Leone, and perhaps Liberia).
But that planned monetary union, until recently envisaged to be launched in 2009, has now been put on ice.
Why? The smallest countries show no signs of fear of being swamped by Nigeria, by far the most populous country in the group (accounting for 155 million of the six countries’ 200 million people), especially as the new West African Central Bank is to be located in Accra, the capital of Ghana (24 million).
Others, though, may fear the dilution of their sovereignty when the new Central Bank of the
takes over some of the policymaking responsibilities of national central banks.
But that, of course, is the chief purpose of a monetary union.
When the West African Monetary Zone finally is established, the number of currencies in Africa will equal about half the number of countries.
And when the East African Community with its five members (Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, and Uganda) re-emerges as scheduled, the number of currencies will be reduced by another four.
The belief that sovereign national currencies, by enabling independent and flexible monetary policies, are the best way to foster economic and social development – the vision of Nigeria’s post-colonial leaders – is gradually falling by the wayside.
Efficiency dictates the use of fewer and larger currencies (and foreign investors, understandably wary of weak and volatile currencies, demand it).
Indeed, the success of the European Union and of the euro since its launch in 1999 has made a strong impression in Africa.
Alexander Hamilton’s Eurozone Tour
PRINCETON – Europe’s debt crisis has piqued Europeans’ interest in American precedents for federal finance.
For many, Alexander Hamilton has become a contemporary hero.
Perhaps one day his face should appear on the €10 banknote.
Specifically, for European states groaning under unbearable debt burdens, Hamilton’s negotiation in 1790 of the new federal government’s assumption of the states’ large debts looks like a tempting model.
Indeed, after Thomas Sargent won the Nobel Prize in Economics last year, he cited it as a precedent in his acceptance speech.
Hamilton argued – against James Madison and Thomas Jefferson – that the debts accumulated by the states during the War of Independence should be assumed by the federation.
There were two sides to his case, one practical, the other philosophical.
Initially, the most appealing argument for his plan was that it would provide greater security to creditors, and thus reduce interest rates, from the 6% at which the states financed their debt to 4%. Hamilton emphasized the importance of a commitment to sound finance as a prerequisite to public economy.
“When the credit of a country is in any degree questionable,” he argued, “it never fails to give an extravagant premium upon all the loans it has occasion to make.”
While that logic certainly appeals to Europeans today, Hamilton insisted on a stronger reason for pursuing sound finance than merely the pursuit of expediency.
There is, he maintained, “an intimate connection between public virtue and public happiness.”
That virtue consisted in honoring commitments, and it would build solidarity in the new political community of the United States.
Indeed, public virtue made federal finance what he called “the powerful cement of our union.”
The condition for success in the American case was that the US raised its own revenue, with federally administered customs houses initially providing the bulk of its receipts.
The logic of a need for specific revenue applies also in modern Europe, where a reformed fiscal system might include common administration of value-added tax (with the additional benefit of eliminating a considerable amount of cross-border fraud).
In the American case, however, unity carried a price: a ceiling was imposed on Virginia’s exposure to the common debt.
Only this inducement to the most powerful state in the union persuaded Madison to drop his opposition to the proposal.
That compromise (which also led to the US capital’s relocation to the District of Columbia, on the border of Virginia and Maryland) may serve as a precedent for limiting Germany’s liabilities if Eurobonds, or some other debt-mutualization scheme, are introduced.
The US experiment in federalized finance was not immediately successful.
Two important components of Hamilton’s financial architecture were not realized, or were realized imperfectly.
He proposed a model of joint-stock banking on a national scale, which ran into immediate opposition (curiously, his proposal was much more influential in Canada).
Second, opponents eventually blocked his proposal for a national central bank.
The charter of the First Bank of the United States was allowed to lapse in 1811; a generation later, in 1836, President Andrew Jackson successfully opposed the charter of the Second Bank of the United States.
Nor did the Hamiltonian scheme of federal finance guarantee a peaceful commonwealth.
In fact, the fiscal union proved to be explosive rather than adhesive.
As international capital markets developed in the early nineteenth century, state governments borrowed on a large scale, quickly turning them from creditors into debtors.
A wave of state defaults followed in the late 1830’s.
A generation later, in the 1860’s, the Civil War between northern and southern states resulted in large part from a dispute about the character of financial burdens –amp at least from the South’s perspective.
Abraham Lincoln’s original proposal to end the immoral practice of slavery by compensating slave owners for manumission was unacceptably expensive, so the Union, according to the slave-holding Confederacy, was determined to expropriate the South.
The federal assumption of states’ debts by itself could not guarantee political order.
The Civil War revealed the centrality of a common foundation of morality to Hamilton’s approach to debt and public finance.
As a result, his approach foundered on the differences between the different states’ conception of morality.
Europeans today have latched onto the practical side of Hamilton’s argument – that is, the idea that debt mutualization might be a means to cheaper credit; but they have worked out neither the political institutions, nor the shared public virtue, that Hamilton deemed crucial.
The extended and politicized debate about debt restructuring has made a Hamiltonian solution more difficult, because the credit of the countries that would be party to it has become questionable.
An obvious starting point for a Hamiltonian Europe would be to set some standard limit for federalized national debt – perhaps the tarnished threshold of 60% of GDP that was mandated (without adequate enforcement) by the Maastricht convergence criteria, or perhaps a lower limit.
Debt exceeding that amount would be left to the responsibility of the member states.
Collective burden-sharing is in the long run the only non-catastrophic way out of Europe’s current crisis, but that requires a substantially greater degree of political accountability and control on a European level.
The lesson to be learned from Hamilton and the US is that the necessary institutions will not function without a greater degree of moral consensus as well.
How We Lose Our Marbles
ATHENS – George Clooney has reignited a longstanding debate after suggesting, in response to a Greek journalist’s question, that removing the Parthenon Marbles, known in Britain as the Elgin Marbles, from London’s British Museum and returning them to their ancient home in Athens would be “the right thing to do.”
In the early nineteenth century, the friezes and sculptures were removed from the Parthenon by Lord Elgin, Britain’s ambassador to the Ottoman Empire from 1799 to 1803.
Elgin sold them to the British government, which put them in the British Museum.
Greece wants them back.
The occasion for this latest round of historical jousting is the release of Clooney’s new film The Monuments Men, which details Allied efforts to rescue art works from the Nazis during World War II.
His comments infuriated London’s provocative mayor, Boris Johnson, himself a classics scholar and author, who shot back that Clooney’s position on the issue was similar to that of the Nazis portrayed in his film.
But the film is of less interest in this dispute than the identity of the characters involved.
Perhaps the most important question is this: Whom is the public inclined to believe – Clooney or Johnson (or perhaps the Nazis)?
Of course, one might ask why the people involved should matter at all; surely the facts of the case should speak for themselves.
And yet, on questions such as this – as with so many important political, social, economic, and cultural issues – what we come to believe is not based on the facts alone, if at all.
Sometimes we may indeed think deeply about the pros and cons of each argument, actively seeking information and data that would support one view over another; in other cases, however, we rely on a “quick and dirty” evaluation of the arguments, focusing not on evidence, but rather on an advocate’s expertise or popularity.
Social and cognitive psychologists have long understood these two basic processes in their study of “dual-process” models, which explain how we process information and eventually form an opinion.
We take the peripheral route to information processing when buying, say, a toaster on a whim, whereas we take the so-called central route – thoroughly considering technical, safety, and aesthetic features – when buying a car.
The systematic study of persuasion began during World War II, when the US Army recognized that fighting a nation mesmerized by Hitler would require bolstering troop motivation and rallying popular support for the war.
They sought help from Yale University psychologist Carl Hovland and his associates, who produced what has become a well-known model of persuasion, comprising three groups of variables related to the communicator, the audience, and the message.
Hovland drew upon ideas dating back to Aristotle’s Rhetoric, which argued that persuasiveness is built on the communicator’s ethical character, the audience’s emotional state, and the logic of the argument, the latter being the most powerful.
Psychological research has shown that any one of these three can be persuasive, depending on the speaker’s attractiveness or the audience’s predisposition.
For example, star-struck female film fans may be especially prone to believe any utterance from Hollywood’s most famous silver fox. Or, in the case of the Nazis, fear may predispose the audience to be persuaded.
But in most cases, when people are confronted with matters of great importance, they are more likely to use the so-called central route to information processing, and rightly so.
Issues of world cultural heritage, for example, deserve conscious, thoughtful deliberation of the facts.
Indeed, it is our duty, and the very basis of any successful civilization, that important decisions are made only after scrutinizing all relevant information and weighing the relative merits of every position.
Once that duty has been fulfilled, a logical person will understand that the Parthenon Marbles, long held by a former imperial power’s flagship museum, were violently severed from the rest of the Parthenon sculptures – an outrage against art and an unhealed scar inflicted by the British on the long-suffering Greek people.
At that point, only one conclusion is possible: The plundered Marbles must be reunited in their historical home and exhibited to the world as the ancient artists intended.
Persuaded?
Perhaps not – I am Greek, after all.
But do not take Clooney’s word for it, either (or Johnson’s).
Deciding the disposition of the world’s cultural patrimony is not like buying a toaster.
Peril and Promise in Algeria
MADRID – Five years after the start of the so-called Arab Spring, the hope that initially characterized those revolutions has largely been dashed.
In many cases, the revolutions have evolved into brutal and protracted internal conflicts, with no solution in sight.
Amid all of this strife, the international community has paid little attention to countries like Algeria, where the revolutionary spirit was stifled while still incipient.
But Algeria’s fate is back on the world’s radar – and not a moment too soon.
On February 7, Algeria’s parliament approved a new package of constitutional reforms, which, among other things, limit presidents to two terms (President Abdelaziz Bouteflika, the last surviving leader of Algeria’s war of independence against France, has been in office since 1999) and recognize some fundamental freedoms.
These steps, in the making since 2011, aim to strengthen Algeria’s democratic standing; but they have been widely criticized as insufficient.
What is not in doubt is that the reforms come at a sensitive time, when Algeria is plagued by political and economic uncertainty.
The “consensus” that supposedly shapes Algerian politics has, in fact, paralyzed decision-making for many years now.
With the ailing Bouteflika not seen in public for more than a year, important questions have emerged about how the 2019 presidential election will play out.
Efforts over the last three years to curtail the power of the security and intelligence services – in September, Mohamed Mediene, who had been chief of the intelligence services since 1990, was forced to retire – are just one source and manifestation of domestic political tension.
Significant external challenges have exacerbated Algeria’s situation.
In particular, with the oil and gas industry accounting for fully 97% of Algeria’s export income, the sharp decline in oil prices since June 2014 has underscored the unsustainability of the country’s economic model.
Falling oil revenues mean that Algeria’s government cannot maintain the broad array of subsidies that traditionally served as a social balm, helping prevent protest.
The government has already had to increase some taxes, while raising prices for fuel, electricity, and gas.
If the price of oil does not rise soon, and Algeria’s leaders are forced to take more drastic measures, social stability could be jeopardized.
To be sure, some factors may help to stave off social unrest – namely, the population’s memories of the brutal civil war of the 1990s, in which more than 150,000 people were killed.
But, memories fade as time passes, and a new generation of young people lack the same fear of social strife that their parents and grandparents have.
In this social context, and if economic hardship persists, protests and even revolt may not be a distant prospect.
To avoid such an outcome, Algeria’s government must work fast to diversify the economy.
But such concerted action will be difficult in the current political environment, especially in view of the government’s increased focus on security challenges in Algeria’s neighborhood.
Given the revolution in Tunisia, the war in Libya, the rebellion of the Tuaregs in Mali, and, most important, the 2013 terrorist attack on Algeria’s large In Amenas gas plant, the country’s leaders are placing an increasingly high priority on regional security.
Although the constitution explicitly prohibits military intervention in other countries, Algeria has a clear interest – reflected in its foreign policy – in ensuring that its neighbors are stable and capable of dissuading extremist groups.
For example, in Libya, Algeria has defended a process of inclusive national reconciliation of all forces, in support of efforts by the United Nations to stabilize the country.
The United States and Europe have already recognized Algeria’s leadership and cooperation in anti-terror efforts in its neighborhood.
For the European Union, a further strengthening of ties with Algeria is particularly important, given both sides’ interest in the stability of nearby North Africa and the Sahel, as well as Algeria’s potential to help improve the EU’s energy security.
One key way Algeria can help improve security cooperation in its region would be to restore diplomatic relations with Morocco.
True, the countries have been at loggerheads for 40 years, owing to their sovereignty dispute over Western Sahara.
But the economic, commercial, and security-related dividends that renewed cooperation would provide should be enough to persuade them to reconsider this position.
If the two North African giants were to recognize their mutual interests and reestablish ties, they would disentangle relations in the Maghreb.
Algeria’s influence across Africa would also receive a boost.
Already, Algeria’s Africa-wide influence may be set to grow.
Some have suggested that an Algerian candidate could become Chair of the Commission of the African Union when the current term expires next July.
Here, Algeria’s consistent support for the AU and its commitment to regional security – exemplified in its role in the Mali peace agreement and its hosting of the Libya talks – would speak in its favor.
If successful, Algeria would become the first North African country to lead the AU.
The severe challenge posed by falling oil prices and a jittery regional context attest to the urgent need for change in Algeria.
But if the government acts to unblock the political system, diversify the economy, and ramp up diplomatic efforts, Algeria can emerge stronger and more influential than ever.
A Sunni-Shia Bridge Too Far
BAGHDAD – Iraq’s recent parliamentary election, the first since United States troops left the country in 2011, was held amid a rising tide of violence that is fast approaching the levels experienced during the 2005-2007 insurgency.
Can the new government restore order and address the many immense challenges that Iraq faces?
The challenges are indeed daunting.
The authorities must resolve fundamental constitutional questions (such as whether Iraq should be a federal state or a confederation), rebuild civil society, reform state institutions, reconstruct the economy, and end the waste and corruption in the oil sector.
But perhaps the most intractable challenge of all is bridging the sectarian rift between the country’s Shia and Sunni citizens.
These fissures are mirrored in other Arab countries (such as Syria, Lebanon, the Gulf countries, and Yemen) and, increasingly, in the wider Muslim world (including Pakistan, Malaysia, and Indonesia).
Is this a historical aberration, or are Islam’s two largest sects condemned to perpetual mutual hostility?
Certainly, there have been periods when the two communities have coexisted peacefully.
But what matters today is that Shia and Sunni relate to their past differently, and that this historical memory can be distorted – and even invented – to create mistrust and hate.
The overthrow of the first Muslim dynasty, the staunchly anti-Shia Umayyads, in the year 750, by the Abbasids, who traced their lineage to the Prophet Muhammad’s uncle, raised hopes, albeit short-lived, of a Sunni-Shia rapprochement.
The 500 years of Abbasid reign that followed provide many valuable illustrations of how these two communities subsequently related to each other.
In particular, there is much to be learned from the different legacies of the caliph al-Nasir (1180-1225) and the last Abbasid caliph, al-Musta’sim (1242-1258).
The rule of al-Nasir – who viewed the Shia as an intrinsic part of the Islamic community and sought to treat all of his subjects equally – was characterized by a marked decrease in sectarian tensions.
By contrast, Sunni-Shia clashes – including killings, arson, and other violence – were common during al-Musta’sim’s rule.
These examples demonstrate the importance of good leadership when communities that uphold different claims to the truth are subject to the same political authority – especially when these communities seek assurance that their survival is not threatened.
Iraq’s current political leaders need to learn from this past and ensure that none of the country’s communities face marginalization or discrimination – lessons that apply throughout the Muslim world.
In Pakistan, for example, there are sectarian killings almost daily; in Malaysia, the tiny Shia population is viewed as an existential threat; and incendiary language dominates discourse about rival sects in Wahhabi circles in Saudi Arabia and far beyond.
Politics and power struggles explain much of the violence and mistrust.
Fear of Iranian-led hegemony, for example, has focused Gulf leaders’ minds on their Shia population’s loyalty.
Malaysia’s political parties use anti-Shia animus to spread fear, helping to attract votes and consolidate power.
Syria and its regional allies are determined to protect a new regional balance of power that shifted in their favor following the US-led invasion of Iraq.
But political calculation cannot explain everything.
The fall of Saddam Hussein in 2003 provides a good example of how a political event, viewed through a sectarian lens, can be interpreted differently.
The US destruction of the Iraqi state brought about a precarious new order that sought to redress years of Sunni dominance by favoring the Shia.
However, the shock of sudden Sunni disempowerment generated a discourse, widely shared in the Muslim world, in which the Shia are guilty of collusion in the US occupation of the country – a view reinforced by events in Syria.
According to this thesis, the Shia simply reverted to their “historic” role as wreckers and fifth columnists.
Was it not the case, it is claimed, that the Shia also colluded with the Mongols in the fall of Baghdad in 1258, culminating in the death of the last Abbasid caliph and the destruction of the Abbasid Empire, the “universal state” of Muslims?
Several medieval Muslim historians pointed to the role of the Shia vizier Ibn al-‘Alqami, arguing that he plotted with the Mongols to bring down the caliphate.
Once the preserve of a handful of scholars, the Ibn al-‘Alqami story now plays a prominent part in today’s Sunni- Shia disputes.
Indeed, “‘Alaqima,” the plural form of the Arabic name “‘Alqami,” is now applied to the Shia as short-hand for treachery.
Social media forums are replete with polemics about the Shia role in assisting both Mongol and US invaders.
Many even claim that Iraq’s Shia are al-‘Alqami’s descendants, and that Nouri al-Maliki, Iraq’s Prime Minister, is his modern incarnation.
These diatribes reflect Iraqi’s polarized historical memory.
Despite ample historical evidence of peaceful inter-communal relations, many people – whether through simple ignorance of history or the need to assert the supremacy of one version of the truth – prefer to consecrate narratives of treachery and betrayal that perpetuate hatred.
More important, the current situation reflects a lack of wisdom, responsibility, and basic decency on the part of political and religious leaders, who prefer to fuel, rather than dampen, inter-communal strife.
Sadly, intolerance has now become a generalized condition.
There is too little knowledge about other communities’ beliefs and history, and what little exists has been overwhelmed by sectarian anger and its poisonous rhetoric.
As long as Sunnis and Shia refuse to think about their past together, it is difficult to foresee a tranquil future together.
And if political and religious leaders are unable or unwilling to seek accommodation, it will be up to like-minded individuals, groups, and civil-society institutions to rebuild mutual respect and find ways to cooperate.
Doing so will require knowledge, patience, and, above all, open minds and hearts.
All in the Family
MUNICH – Big economic crises often cause iconic companies to falter.
Rupert Murdoch’s media empire is a model of the modern global enterprise.
A particularly dynamic and innovative business model came from outside and took over central aspects of British and then American public life.
That model is now threatened by the fallout from the scandal that started with phone hacking in Murdoch’s British press operations.
The Murdoch experience is a microcosm of how modern globalization works.
Murdoch always looked like a foreign intrusion into British life. It was not just that he was Australian; he also brought new ideas.
In particular, the application of digital technology, introduced after a ferocious struggle with the powerful print unions, brought substantial cost savings and allowed a new era of journalism.
Even more importantly, Murdoch represented a concept of family business that is common in many parts of the world, but relatively rare in Britain and the United States.
Family capitalism in the continental European model uses relatively little capital to achieve maximum control.
It frequently depends on very complex corporate structures, with multiple layers of holding companies, as well as privileged shares that can guarantee the continuation of control.
This sort of firm is also very common in the most dynamic emerging-market economies in Asia and Latin America.
The Murdoch family holds only 12% of the shares of News Corporation, the top-level holding company, but it wields about two-fifths of the voting rights; other votes are held by a loyal Saudi prince.
For decades, academic analysts have been fighting over whether such large-scale family businesses should be considered beneficial.
Their defenders point out that such companies often have a much longer-term vision than is true of managerial capitalism, which enables them to establish strong and enduring relationships with their customers and suppliers.
At least in the case of the Murdoch empire, it now appears that they pursue long and binding relationships with politicians and the police as well.
Indeed, political entanglements are one of two sources of weakness in European-style family capitalism, as owners seek political advantages and preferred access as much as they strive for technical innovation.
Murdoch’s empire depended on its closeness to politicians.
In retrospect, three successive British prime ministers – Tony Blair, Gordon Brown, and David Cameron – were on overly familiar terms with a manipulative business leader.
Cameron now talks about the need for “a healthier relationship between politicians and media owners.”
And Murdoch apparently is now saying that he wishes that all these prime ministers would “leave me alone.”
The second notorious weakness of family businesses is the problem of succession.
When he appeared before the British parliament in July, Rupert Murdoch looked like an old man, remote and out of control.
In old-style family firms, there is a clear rule of succession that the oldest son takes over.
But that rule is rightly recognized as being potentially dysfunctional.
There is obviously no guarantee that the oldest son is the best businessman, and the result could be bitter and ferocious sibling rivalry.
Such succession disputes become even more acute when there are multiple marriages and multiple sets of competing children.
Until the eruption of the current scandal, the youngest of Murdoch’s three children from his second marriage, James, was generally believed to stand the greatest chance of succeeding his father.
The complexities of modern marriage patterns make family life much more fraught, especially when phenomenal power and huge sums of money are involved.
All three of Murdoch’s marriages have produced children, though those from his current relationship are too young to be considered potential corporate successors.
In addition, succession planning can become complicated by the emergence of “substitute children” from the company’s management.
Rebekah Brooks, the editor of The News of the World at the beginning of the phone-hacking scandal, and subsequently the chief executive of News International, Murdoch’s British subsidiary, played precisely such a role.
The disintegration of the business empire is then accompanied and amplified by bitter disputes between the children and the substitute children.
Indeed, the crisis of the Murdoch family’s business empire is neither unique nor unprecedented.
In the first half of the 1990’s, many observers of the alleged Asian economic miracle emphasized trust and families’ capacity to cooperate with political authorities in order to realize long-term growth plans.
After the 1997-1998 Asia crisis, and as authoritarian regimes in South Korea and Indonesia disintegrated, these relationships were suddenly interpreted as corrupt, and the counter-view – that “crony capitalism” had become entrenched in these countries – soon prevailed.
The Arab Spring has been in large part a movement against corrupt family capitalism, embodied not only in ruling families like the Ben Alis, the Mubaraks, and the Assads, but also in the large family business empires that depended on and supported them.
As a result of globalization, large family firms could increase their size and their geographic range.
But globalization also increases the chances of backlashes that focus on the vulnerabilities, weaknesses, and mistakes of big family firms.
They are vulnerable to an Arab Spring (and a British summer) – and maybe to a US autumn that will focus not just on the Murdochs’ business, but also on its interplay with politics.
All Man’s Land
NEW DELHI – Ernest Hemingway’s collection of stories, Men without Women, examines tense gender relationships.
In a particularly poignant story, a young man convinces his partner to have an abortion, viewing their unborn child as a hindrance to the status quo. Frustrated, the woman gives in.
That story, published more than 80 years ago, remains relevant today in India, where female fetuses face severe risks.
According to the 2011 census, the sex ratio of the country’s children has dipped from 927 females per 1000 males to 914, a 60-year low.
Ratios in the northern states are particularly alarming: only Himachal Pradesh now has a ratio of girls to boys above 900.
Despite being illegal, ultrasound sex-determination tests are being used across India to identify for abortion extraordinary numbers of healthy female fetuses.
But there are serious concerns about legal operations, too.
Genitoplasty – a sex-change operation on newborn girls – is a mushrooming, and deeply disturbing, business in India.
There’s only one word for it: gendercide.
Left unchecked, it will leave India’s next generation of men with a severe shortage of women.
Indian couples have a strong cultural preference, bordering on obsession, for sons over daughters – despite the strides in education and employment that women have made over the last few decades.
Education and wealth have nothing to do with it – in fact, some of the worst-affected areas are in India’s wealthiest cities.
However discomfiting a possibility, the real culprit might be Indian culture and tradition itself.
The expenses and pressure of the dowry system, and the fact that, in most joint families, only sons inherit property and wealth, contribute to this favoritism.
Perhaps just as important is that sons typically live with their parents even after they are married, and assume responsibility for parents in their old age.
Daughters, who live with their in-laws after they marry, are viewed as amanat – someone else’s property.
In short, sons represent income and daughters an expense.
In the old days, when families typically had 5-10 children, this didn’t matter so much.
The number of sons and daughters often evened out.
But, for today’s smaller families, whether the children are two boys or two girls influences everything from financial planning to preparations for old age.
Many have argued that Indian women should stand up to their families and refuse to abort their daughters.
But Indian women want male children just as much.
Unlike Hemingway’s character, they are often more than willing to abort a girl and try for a boy.
The novelist Salman Rushdie once put the question to supporters of abortion rights: “What should be done when a woman uses her power over her own body to discriminate against female fetuses?”
This raises other questions concerning the consequences of a large shortage of girls.
Will women be valued and treasured?
Or will the oversupply of men result in more bride trafficking, sexual violence, and female suicides?
Niall Ferguson, the British historian, cites scholars who attribute Japan’s imperial expansion after 1914 to a male youth bulge, and who link the rise of Islamist extremism to an Islamic youth bulge.
“Maybe the coming generation of Asian men without women will find harmless outlets for their inevitable frustrations, like team sports or video games.
But I doubt it,” he writes.
He warns us not to be surprised if, in the coming generation, “shrill nationalism is replaced by macho militarism or even imperialism.”
Unfortunately, there is no instant solution.
Saving our girls will require radically altering some of Indian society’s family arrangements, traditions, and attitudes.
And there is no easy way to accomplish this.
Legislation alone won’t help, for tradition is a law unto itself.
Hindu religious law, for example, allows a woman to claim an equal share in her parents’ wealth, but few exercise this right.
Culturally, she feels that she does not have an equal claim on her father’s property.
Nonetheless, India does need new laws – direct and enforceable – that clamp down on the cultural practices that underpin destructive traditions.
For example, India could enforce a ceiling on wedding expenditure – typically a father’s biggest expense associated with his daughter.
Constrained from spending on the wedding, he would compensate her differently – perhaps with a larger inheritance.
Gradually, this would become the norm, and tradition would adjust accordingly.
(Interestingly, the state of Kerala, whose people adhere to matrilineal inheritance, has among the most equal sex ratios and literacy rates in India.)
A more radical measure, which some have advocated, would be direction intervene, with the state providing benefits for families with more girls.
Perhaps the authorities could also penalize families with boys, at least temporarily.
India imagines herself as a woman – Bharat Mata, or Mother India.
The irony is that, unless far-reaching changes are made soon, Mother India could eventually be the only woman left in the country.
All Stimulus Roads Lead to China
BEIJING – Now that the “green shoots” of recovery have withered, the debate over fiscal stimulus is back with a vengeance.
In the United States, those who argue for another stimulus package observe that it was always wishful thinking to believe that a $787 billion package could offset a $3 trillion fall in private spending.
But unemployment has risen even faster and further than expected.
Combine this with the continued fall in housing prices, and it is understandable that consumer spending remains depressed.
The banks, having been recapitalized only to the extent necessary to keep them afloat, still have weak balance sheets.
Their consequent reluctance to lend constrains investment.
Meanwhile, state governments, seeing revenues fall as a result of lower taxable incomes last year, are cutting back like mad.
If there was a case for additional stimulus back in February, that case is even stronger now.
But the case against additional stimulus is also strong.
The US federal deficit is an alarming 12% of GDP, and public debt as a share of national income is already projected to double, to 80% of GDP.
The idea that the US can grow out of its debt burden, as did Finland and Sweden following their financial crises in the 1990’s, seems unrealistic.
Given all this, more deficit spending will only stoke fears of higher future taxes and inflation.
It will encourage the reemergence of global imbalances.
And it will not reassure consumers or investors.
It is possible to argue the economics both ways, but the politics all point in one direction.
The US Congress lacks the stomach for another stimulus package.
It has already faced intense criticism for its failure to get the country’s fiscal house in order.
The slowness with which the first stimulus has been rolled out, and the fact that it will take even more time for its full effects to be felt, provides more fodder for the chattering classes.
Disappointment over the effects of the TARP has already destroyed popular – and Congressional – support for more public money to recapitalize the banks.
So, even those who find the economic logic of arguments for fiscal activism compelling must acknowledge that the politics are not supportive.
A second stimulus simply is not in the cards.
If there is going to be more aggregate demand, it can come from only one place.
That place is not Europe or Japan, where debts are even higher than in the US – and the demographic preconditions for servicing them less favorable.
Rather, it is emerging markets like China.
The problem is that China has already done a lot to stimulate domestic demand, both through government spending and by directing its banks to lend.
As a result, its stock market is frothy, and it is experiencing an alarming property boom.
Through May, property prices were up 18% year on year.
Understandably, Chinese officials worry about bubble trouble.
The obvious way to square this circle is to spend more on imports.
China can purchase more industrial machinery, transport equipment, and steelmaking material, which are among its leading imports from the US.
Directing spending toward imports of capital equipment would avoid overheating China’s own markets, boost the economy’s productive capacity (and thus its ability to grow in the future), and support demand for US, European, and Japanese products just when such support is needed most.
This strategy is not without risks.
Allowing the renminbi to appreciate as a way of encouraging imports may also discourage exports, the traditional motor of Chinese growth.
And lowering administrative barriers to imports might redirect more spending toward foreign goods than the authorities intend.
But these are risks worth taking if China is serious about assuming a global leadership role.
The question is what China will get in return.
And the answer brings us back, full circle, to where we started, namely to US fiscal policy.
China is worried that its more than $1 trillion investment in US Treasury securities will not hold its value.
It wants reassurance that the US will stand behind its debts. It therefore wants to see a credible program for balancing the US budget once the recession ends.
And, tough talk notwithstanding, the Obama administration has yet to offer a credible roadmap for fiscal consolidation.
Doing so would reassure American taxpayers worried about current deficits. Just as importantly, it would reassure Chinese policymakers.
We live in a multipolar world where neither the US nor China is large enough to exercise global economic leadership on its own.
For China, leadership means assuming additional risks.
But for this to be tolerable, the US needs to relieve China of existing risks.
Only by working together can the two countries lead the world economy out of its current doldrums.
A Long March with China
BEIJING – US Vice President Joe Biden’s recent four-day visit to China ended on a high note.
He assured Chinese leaders that the United States is committed to honoring all its debts, despite its recent credit downgrade; he talked enthusiastically about US-China interdependence; and he showcased his granddaughter, who has studied Chinese for several years, as a future bridge between the two countries.
But, behind all the smiles and banquet toasts, serious issues and perception gaps continue to divide the world’s two great powers.
For starters, there is always an attitude problem.
To those who view China’s rise in a negative light, the country is simply becoming ever more arrogant.
It is getting tough in its territorial disputes with Japan in the East China Sea; it is becoming assertive in the South China Sea with its neighbors, also over disputed islands; it put its own stealth fighter on display during the US defense secretary’s visit to China; it is sending its first aircraft carrier out to sea for trials, indicating the possibility of establishing naval bases in the Indian Ocean.
Even a brawl between the Chinese and a visiting American basketball team is viewed as evidence of China’s aggressive behavior.
Many Chinese, on the other hand, tend to think that the US is suffering from severe case of conceited superpower syndrome.
As these Chinese see it, the US has a rather dysfunctional government, but nevertheless insists that its political and economic system is the best in the world, and that everyone should emulate it.
It is heavily in debt, but cannot stop spending and borrowing.
It is no longer competitive in manufacturing, but blames others for its huge trade deficit.
And the world’s only military superpower is often seen within China as trigger-happy when intervening in other countries’ internal affairs.
Then, there is the issue of trust.
China’s critics argue that its claims to a peaceful rise are not credible, given the country’s non-democratic, one-party system.
Coupled with this is a zero-sum view of the world, in which any Chinese gain in the share of the global economy, or any increased presence in many parts of the world, must be at the expense of the US or other powers.
Any Chinese military move is portrayed as an expansionary and aggressive act that must be contained.
Any attempts at engagement by Western politicians, such as Biden’s recent trip, are automatically met with doubt and criticism for cozying up to dictators.
Likewise, for those Chinese who are suspicious of US intentions, conspiracy is always in play.
They see a declining superpower using economic, military, and diplomatic means in an unrelenting effort to prevent China’s rise.
Talk of human rights and democracy is nothing but a smoke screen for demonizing China.
Arms sales to Taiwan, Tibetan activism, and “color revolutions” of various kinds are all sponsored by the US and other Western powers, and are aimed at weakening China.
Despite decades of close interaction, with millions of Americans, Europeans, and Japanese visiting China every year and similar numbers of Chinese now visiting the US and other advanced countries, both sides see each other through a glass darkly.
Increased interdependence has not led to better understandings on even some of the most basic issues.
China’s Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs Fu Ying expressed her country’s anxiety about this state of affairs in a recent interview. “The most important thing is the question of whether China and the US are enemies.
Are we going to be in a war?
Are we preparing for a war against each other?”
Biden, while reaffirming that the US does not view China as an enemy, implied that Fu’s worries are not fanciful, saying that the worst scenario is a misunderstanding that leads to an unintended conflict.
So the key issue for China, its neighbors, the US, and rest of the world is not how many aircraft carriers, missiles, submarines, and next-generation fighters China may produce and deploy in the coming years and decades. Rather, it is how China intends to use its newly acquired economic and military strength in pursuing its domestic and foreign-policy goals – and how the world’s leading powers can ensure that they do not end up harming each other by accident or misunderstanding.
To meet these challenges successfully, there is no viable alternative to a positive, continuous, and frank engagement between China and the rest of the world.
The Chinese economy will continue to grow; the Chinese military will continue to modernize; and the Chinese people will remain united in their Great Power aspirations.
A Cold War-style confrontation and containment policy from the West will be met with strong resistance from the Chinese, whose global leverage, particularly in finance, cannot be ignored.
Only a patient, creative, and consistent engagement strategy will mitigate fears on both sides.
China’s rise is a fact; the enduring peacefulness of that rise must be a priority for China, its neighbors, the West, and, most importantly, the US.
Alpine Schadenfreude
Not surprisingly, the atmosphere at this year’s World Economic Forum was grim.
Those who think that globalization, technology, and the market economy will solve the world’s problems seemed subdued.
Most chastened of all were the bankers.
Against the backdrop of the sub-prime crisis, the disasters at many financial institutions, and the weakening of the stock market, these “masters of the universe” seemed less omniscient than they did a short while ago.
And it was not just the bankers who were in the Davos doghouse this year, but also their regulators – the central bankers.
Anyone who goes to international conferences is used to hearing Americans lecture everyone else about transparency.
There was still some of that at Davos.
I heard the usual suspects – including a former treasury secretary who had been particularly vociferous in such admonishments during the East Asia crisis – bang on about the need for transparency at sovereign wealth funds (though not at American or European hedge funds).
But this time, developing countries could not resist commenting on the hypocrisy of it all.  There was even a touch of schadenfreude in the air about the problems the United States is having right now – though it was moderated, of course, by worries about the downturn’s impact on their own economies.
Had America really told others to bring in American banks to teach them about how to run their business?
Had America really boasted about its superior risk management systems, going so far as to develop a new regulatory system (called Basle II)?
Basle II is dead – at least until memories of the current disaster fade.
Bankers – and the rating agencies – believed in financial alchemy.
They thought that financial innovations could somehow turn bad mortgages into good securities, meriting AAA ratings.
But one lesson of modern finance theory is that, in well functioning financial markets, repackaging risks should not make much difference.
If we know the price of cream and the price of skim milk, we can figure out the price of milk with 1% cream, 2% cream, or 4% cream.
There might be some money in repackaging, but not the billions that banks made by slicing and dicing sub-prime mortgages into packages whose value was much greater than their contents.
It seemed too good to be true – and it was.
Worse, banks failed to understand the first principle of risk management: diversification only works when risks are not correlated, and macro-shocks (such as those that affect housing prices or borrowers’ ability to repay) affect the probability of default for all mortgages. 
I argued at Davos that central bankers also got it wrong by misjudging the threat of a downturn and failing to provide sufficient regulation.
They waited too long to take action.
Because it normally takes a year or more for the full effects of monetary policy to be felt, central banks need to act preemptively, not reactively.
Worse, the US Federal Reserve and its previous chairman, Alan Greenspan, may have helped create the problem, encouraging households to take on risky variable-rate mortgages by reassuring those who worried about a housing bubble that there was at most a little “froth” in the market.
Normally, a Davos audience would rally to the support of the central bankers.
This time, a vote at the end of the session supported my view by a margin of three to one. 
Even the plea of one of central banker that “no one could have predicted the problems” moved few in the audience – perhaps because several people sitting there had, like me, explicitly warned about the impending problem in previous years.
The only thing we got wrong was how bad banks’ lending practices were, how non-transparent banks really were, and how inadequate their risk management systems were.
It was interesting to see the different cultural attitudes to the crisis on display.
In Japan, the CEO of a major bank would have apologized to his employees and his country, and would have refused his pension and bonus so that those who suffered as a result of corporate failures could share the money.
He would have resigned.
In America, the only questions are whether a board will force a CEO to leave and, if so, how big his severance package will be.
When I asked one CEO whether there was any discussion of returning their bonuses, the response was not just no, but an aggressive defense of the bonus system. 
This is the third US crisis in the past 20 years, after the Savings &amp; Loan crisis of 1989 and the Enron/WorldCom crisis in 2002.
Deregulation has not worked.
Unfettered markets may produce big bonuses for CEO’s, but they do not lead, as if by an invisible hand, to societal well-being.
Until we achieve a better balance between markets and government, the world will continue to pay a high price.
Effective Altruism
PRINCETON – Can humans really be motivated by altruism?
My new book, The Most Good You Can Do, discusses the emerging new movement called Effective Altruism, and, in doing interviews about the book, I am surprised by how often that question is asked.
Why should we doubt that some people act altruistically, at least some of the time?
In evolutionary terms, we can easily understand altruism toward kin and others who can reciprocate our help.
It seems plausible that once our ability to reason and reflect has developed sufficiently enough to enable us to understand that strangers can suffer and enjoy life just as we can, then at least some of us would act altruistically toward strangers, too.
The polling organization Gallup asked people in 135 countries whether they had, in the last month, donated money to a charity, volunteered their time to an organization, or helped a stranger.
Gallup’s results, which form the basis of the World Giving Index 2014, indicate that approximately 2.3 billion people, a third of the world’s population, perform at least one altruistic act per month.
More objective evidence of altruism buttresses these findings.
In many countries, the supply of blood for medical purposes relies on voluntary, anonymous donations.
Worldwide, more than 11 million people have put their names on donor registries for bone marrow, signifying their willingness to donate their marrow to a stranger.
A small but growing number of people have gone further still, donating a kidney to a stranger.
There were 177 altruistic donations by living donors in the United States in 2013 and 118 in the United Kingdom in the year to April 2014.
Then there are those who donate to charity.
In the US alone, individuals gave $240 billion to charity in 2013.
Foundations and corporations topped this up to a total of $335 billion, or about 2% of gross national income.
The US is often said to be more charitable than other countries; but, in terms of the proportion of the population donating money, Myanmar, Malta, Ireland, the UK, Canada, the Netherlands, and Iceland all do better.
In Myanmar, 91% of the people surveyed had given money in the past month (the corresponding figure for the US is 68%), indicating the strong hold of the Theravada Buddhist tradition of donating to support monks and nuns.
Myanmar also had the highest percentage of people volunteering time (51%).
The US did, however, have the highest ranking for “helping a stranger.”
That, together with a high ranking for volunteering time, led it to tie with Myanmar as the most generous nation in the world.
Admittedly, not all of this giving is altruistic.
New York’s Lincoln Center announced last month that the billionaire entertainment industry mogul David Geffen has donated $100 million toward the renovation of its concert facility, Avery Fisher Hall, on the condition that it is renamed David Geffen Hall.
That gift seems motivated more by a desire for fame than a desire to do good.
After all, as Geffen presumably knew, the family of Avery Fisher had to be compensated with a payment of $15 million in order to agree to the renaming.
In any case, in a world with a billion people living in extreme poverty, it would not be difficult for an altruist to appreciate that there are many ways of doing more good than renovating a concert hall for well-off music lovers.
At the opposite end of the giving spectrum, psychologists who study giving behavior have suggested that people who give small sums of money to a large number of charities may be motivated less by the desire to help others than by the warm glow they get from making a donation.
By contrast, other donors give larger sums, usually to only a handful of charities chosen on the basis of some knowledge about what the charity is doing.
They want to have a positive impact on the world.
Their gifts may also make their lives better, but this is not what motivates them.
The Effective Altruism movement consists of people who give in the latter way, combining the head and the heart.
Their aim is to do the most good they can with the resources that they are willing to set aside for that purpose.
Those resources may include a tenth, a quarter, or even half of their income.
Their altruism may include their time and talents, and influence their choice of career.
To achieve their aims, they use reason and evidence to ensure that whatever resources they devote to doing good will be as effective as possible.
Several studies show that people who are generous are typically happier and more satisfied with their lives than those who do not give.
And other studies show that giving leads to activity in the reward centers of the brain (the areas of the brain that are also stimulated by tasty food and sex).
But this does not mean that these donors are not altruistic.
Their direct motive is to help others, and their giving makes them happier only as a consequence of the fact that it does help others.
If we had more such people, we would have more giving, and that is what we want.
To define “altruism” so narrowly that the term can be applied only when giving is contrary to a person’s overall interest would miss the point that the best situation to bring about is one in which promoting the interests of others harmonizes with promoting one’s own.
Testing Times for Alzheimer’s
LONDON – Alzheimer’s disease is by far the most common cause of dementia and one of the world’s most feared disorders.
By 2050, there will be 135 million Alzheimer’s sufferers worldwide, a threefold increase from today, with three-quarters of cases occurring in low- and middle-income countries.
Predicting the onset of Alzheimer’s, let alone preventing or curing it, remains an immense challenge.
Alzheimer’s disease was identified more than a century ago from autopsy results that showed characteristic brain lesions called “amyloid plaques.”
The disease is more difficult to diagnose in the living.
Doctors rely on observation of memory loss and other thinking deficits (such as reasoning or language comprehension) – signs that plaques are already present in the brain.
But any cure&nbsp;would have to be administered before the plaques form, and years before symptoms of dementia appear.
Alzheimer’s might be more predictable if scientists had the time and resources to conduct far-reaching longitudinal studies over many years.
Such studies ideally would involve blood, imaging, memory, and medical tests, as well as detailed lifestyle questionnaires filled out by thousands of young and middle-aged people.
Study participants would be followed over decades to see who developed the disease, and which tests proved positive before Alzheimer’s was diagnosed.
In fact, two famous longitudinal studies – the Framingham Heart Study in Massachusetts and the Kungsholmen Project in Sweden – have led to important progress in predicting the disease.
These studies found that short-term memory may be impaired for up to ten years before an Alzheimer’s diagnosis.
Major advances have since been made in brain imaging, biochemical analysis, and, perhaps most important, genetic testing.
Indeed, the risk of Alzheimer’s doubles if a parent or sibling has it, probably due in large part to the presence of the ApoE gene.
The risk triples for Europeans who inherit a particular type of ApoE, called ε4; inheriting two copies of ε4 increases the risk roughly tenfold.
But genetic testing alone is unlikely to be an accurate predictor, because around half of Alzheimer’s sufferers do not carry ε4, and probably half of those with ε4 do not develop the disease.
Moreover, though international studies of more than 70,000 people have found over 20 other genes linked to Alzheimer’s, their impact is minimal.
That said, a&nbsp;groundbreaking 2012 study&nbsp;published in the&nbsp;New England Journal of Medicine, analyzed a rare genetic mutation found in just 500 families around the world, which would lead to Alzheimer’s before the age of 50.
The study showed which tests were able to predict the outcome most accurately decades ahead of onset.
The research found that amyloid-beta – the substance that clumps together and forms amyloid plaques – becomes depleted in the cerebrospinal fluid around the brain as long as 25 years before the onset of dementia.
Fifteen years prior to onset, a positron emission tomography (PET) scan showed amyloid-beta being deposited in plaques in the brain itself.
And detailed short-term memory tests were abnormal ten years before onset, as suggested in the Framingham and Kungsholmen studies.
These tests are now becoming part of clinical practice, and are available commercially.
Memory and other cognitive tests can reveal whether one has minor problems with some aspects of thinking – a condition known as “mild cognitive impairment” that precedes Alzheimer’s disease.
The problem is that the tests must be administered by a trained neuropsychologist and take more than an hour to complete; moreover, many people with mild cognitive impairment do not progress to dementia.
Sampling cerebrospinal fluid via a lumbar puncture (or “spinal tap”) can predict which people with mild cognitive impairment will progress to dementia with over 80% accuracy, but this still means a misdiagnosis for one in five patients.
PET scans are slightly less accurate, while routine MRI brain scans can reveal with perhaps only 70% accuracy subtle abnormalities in people with mild cognitive impairment.
Scientists are therefore still searching for an accurate predictive test that is cheaper, quicker, and less invasive than PET scans or lumbar punctures.
This year, two small studies of blood tests seemed to predict Alzheimer’s 1-3 years before it occurred, but the tests are complicated and require the measurement of ten or more substances.
Whichever predictive methods doctors use over the next few years will probably enable them to inform those patients with mild cognitive impairment about their chances of developing Alzheimer’s in the short term.
The trickier question is whether we will be able to predict Alzheimer’s disease accurately in those with normal cognition and memory, or to predict it more than five years in advance.
Even if accurate early prediction of Alzheimer’s eventually is achieved, there are currently no drugs available to prevent or cure it before the amyloid plaques start destroying the mind.
That will be our next great challenge.
A Mania for Diagnosing Bipolar Disorder
PROVIDENCE, RI – During the past few years, many experts have suggested that bipolar disorder – a serious illness resulting in significant psychosocial morbidity and excess mortality – is under-recognized, particularly in patients with major depression.
Even patients who are diagnosed with bipolar disorder often wait more than 10 years after initially seeking treatment for the correct diagnosis to be made.
The clinical implications of the failure to recognize bipolar disorder in depressed patients include the under-prescription of mood-stabilizing medications, and an increased risk of rapid “cycling” – swings between manic and depressive phases.
But, perhaps as a consequence of concerted efforts to improve the recognition of bipolar disorder, during the past few years we have observed the emergence of an opposite phenomenon – over-diagnosis.
In my own practice, my colleagues and I have encountered patients who reported that they were previously diagnosed with bipolar disorder, despite lacking a history of manic or hypomanic episodes.
To be sure, we have also seen patients seeking treatment for depression who really did have bipolar disorder.
However, there seemed to be more over-diagnosis than under-diagnosis.
We therefore conducted a study to examine empirically how often bipolar disorder might be over- and under-diagnosed.
Seven hundred psychiatric outpatients were interviewed with the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV (SCID) and completed a self-administered questionnaire that asked whether they had been previously diagnosed by a health-care professional with bipolar or manic-depressive disorder.
Family history information was obtained from the patient regarding their immediate relatives.
Slightly more than 20% (145 patients) in our sample reported that they had been previously diagnosed as having bipolar disorder, significantly higher than the 12.9% rate based on the SCID.
Less than half of those who reported that they had been previously diagnosed with bipolar disorder were diagnosed with bipolar disorder based on the SCID.
Patients with SCID-diagnosed bipolar disorder had a significantly higher risk of bipolar disorder in their immediate family members than patients who self-reported a previous diagnosis of bipolar disorder that was not confirmed by the SCID.
Patients who self-reported a previous diagnosis of bipolar disorder that was not confirmed by the SCID did not have a significantly higher risk for bipolar disorder than the patients who were negative for bipolar disorder by self-report and the SCID.
Our findings, validated by family history, thus suggest that bipolar disorder was over-diagnosed.
Any study seeking to determine whether a psychiatric disorder is over-diagnosed will find that some patients with the condition do not have it upon re-interview.
Such is the nature of the imperfect reliability of psychiatric diagnosis.
The question, then, is not whether
Over-diagnosis of bipolar disorder has costs.
Mood stabilizers are the treatment of choice, and, depending on the medication, they can produce potentially significant health complications affecting renal, endocrine, hepatic, immunologic, or metabolic function.
Thus, over-diagnosing bipolar disorder can unnecessarily expose patients to serious side-effects of medication.
The impact of marketing efforts by pharmaceutical companies and publicity probably plays a role in the emerging tendency to over-diagnose bipolar disorder.
Direct-to-consumer advertisements that refer individuals to screening questionnaires can result in patients suggesting to their doctors that they have bipolar disorder.
We have seen evidence of this in our practice.
This does not necessarily reflect a problem with the performance of a screening questionnaire, but rather how these scales are used.
Screening questionnaires maximize sensitivity, at a cost of false positives, because it is presumed that they are followed by expert clinical evaluation.
But insufficient diagnostic rigor can result in over-diagnosis.
Clinicians are inclined to diagnose disorders that they feel more comfortable treating.
We believe that the increased availability of medications that have been approved for the treatment of bipolar disorder might be influencing clinicians who are unsure whether or not a patient has bipolar disorder or borderline personality disorder to err on the side of diagnosing the disorder that is responsive to medication.
This bias is reinforced by the marketing message of pharmaceutical companies to physicians, which has emphasized research on delayed diagnosis and under-recognition of bipolar disorder, possibly sensitizing clinicians accordingly.
The campaign against under-recognition has probably resulted in some anxious, agitated, and/or irritable depressed patients who complain of insomnia and “racing thoughts” being misdiagnosed with bipolar disorder.
The results of our study are consistent with prior studies suggesting possible problems with the diagnosis of bipolar disorder.
With the greater number of medications approved for the treatment of bipolar disorder, along with multiple reports cautioning clinicians against under-diagnosis, it appears that over-diagnosis has become a greater problem than under-diagnosis.
Both can have negative consequences.
While there is still some uncertainty as to the best assessment approach, we recommend that clinicians use a standardized, validated method.
When Tweets Trump Diplomacy
NEW DELHI – Diplomacy often witnesses unusual spats.
There was the Pig and Potato War of 1859, the Affair of the Dancing Lamas in 1924, and the Bogotá Bracelet incident of 1970, to name just a few.
But few were more surprising than the just-concluded Episode of the Offensive Doormats.
The e-commerce giant Amazon – which has lately been cultivating India as the next frontier of its global expansion, reflected in plans to invest $5 billion in the country – was recently startled by a series of intemperate tweets from Indian External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj.
In just a few 140-character messages, Swaraj denounced the company and threatened to cancel its employees’ visas and refuse visas to its executives in the future.
What provoked Swaraj’s outburst was a Twitter user’s complaint to her that the Amazon Canada website offered for sale doormats depicting the Indian flag.
The notion that dirty shoes would be wiped on a representation of the Indian flag had outraged the tweeter, Atul Bhobe, who contacted – and found an advocate in – Swaraj.
Amazon was swift to respond.
After clarifying that the offending doormats were technically being offered by a third-party supplier, not Amazon itself, the company removed them from the Amazon Canada website and “implemented measures to ensure that these products could not be sold on any of our other marketplaces or websites.”
Amazon’s India country manager offered an apology to Swaraj for “hurting Indian sensibilities” and, recalling the company’s $5 billion investment commitment, reiterated Amazon’s dedication to the country.
Less than 24 hours after the doormat crisis erupted, the matter was defused.
But the episode raises a number of broader issues that won’t disappear so quickly.
The first issue is Swaraj’s use of Twitter.
Swaraj stands out among her peers in India for her trigger-happy approach to tweeting (though her use of the platform is still dwarfed by that of US President-elect Donald Trump, who often uses Twitter as a bully pulpit).
I certainly do not oppose the use of Twitter by public officials.
On the contrary, I view the growing comfort of government ministers with social media as a matter for celebration.
It is a welcome change from my time as Minister of State for External Affairs, under the previous government, when official computers were barred from accessing social media, and the tweets I issued from my own devices would often become the stuff of needless controversy.
But Swaraj may well be going too far, responding to every individual case of a lost passport or delayed visa tweeted to her – an approach that has earned her the not-entirely-flattering sobriquet of “India’s Minister for Consular Affairs.”
That a foreign minister would respond to a Twitter complaint on such trivial matters, some would argue, seems to indicate that she lacks more important things to do.
(The suggestion undoubtedly reflects the fact that, under Prime Minister Narendra Modi, substantive foreign policy is conducted largely by him and his office, rather than by the External Affairs Ministry that Swaraj leads.)
But the problem extends beyond Swaraj’s communication with ordinary citizens.
In the recent doormat drama, she also used Twitter to issue instructions to her own diplomats, tweeting at the Indian High Commission in Canada to deal with the “unacceptable” matter, by taking it up with Amazon “at the highest level.”
Such a move is unprecedented, and not particularly welcome.
Social media is no substitute for a diplomatic cable.
Also less than diplomatic was the language Swaraj used in her warning to the company.
“Amazon must tender unconditional apology,” she tweeted.
“They must withdraw all products insulting our national flag immediately.
If this is not done forthwith, we will not grant Indian Visa to any Amazon official. We will also rescind the Visas issued earlier.”
A profession famed for summoning ambassadors for a discreet dressing-down has been reduced to upbraiding companies on Twitter.
The final issue that the doormat incident brought to the fore is Indians’ tendency to take offense at the slightest affront – a tendency that is now being elevated, by the thumbs of a top minister, to the level of official policy.
Of course, disrespect for the national flag is derided in most countries, and has been a criminal offense in India since 1971, with the adoption of the Prevention of Insults to National Honor Act, which threatens whoever “mutilates, defaces, disfigures, destroys, tramples upon, or otherwise shows disrespect to” the Indian flag with imprisonment.
But Indians have a particularly low threshold for what qualifies as disrespect.
Whereas in other democracies, flags are used freely and harmlessly on t-shirts, boots, bikinis, and even underwear, in India, the majesty of the flag can, it seems, be tarnished by any tawdry manufacturer of gewgaws.
And it’s not just the flag.
Last year, Amazon enraged many Indians by offering doormats with pictures of Indian gods and goddesses, prompting the furious hashtag #BoycottAmazon.
Two years earlier, the company’s website had caused similar outrage by selling women’s leggings with images of Hindu gods.
So Amazon is no stranger to the anger of offended Indians.
But the company’s swift capitulation in the latest incident – which will surely not be the last – shows that the value of a gigantic market like India far outweighs that of any single product.
China has already proved that it can dictate terms to multinationals that covet its vast market.
India, it seems, will follow suit.
But whoever has emerged as the winner of the doormat debacle – outraged Twitter users, perhaps – diplomacy has been the loser.
Ambivalent Arabia
A democratic tide seems to be sweeping across the Arab world.
Even the traditional Arab monarchies and Emirates are changing in its wake.
Kuwait now allows women to vote, Qatar has embraced an ambitious reform program, Bahrain has shown great tolerance of mass demonstrations, and the U.A.E. is allowing something like a free press.
But Saudi Arabia continues to be deeply wary of any sort of change, and thus remains a huge and seemingly immovable obstacle to region-wide reform.
Although the Saudi ruling family, the al-Saud, is under enormous pressure to follow the example of its neighbors, internal resistance to doing so remains very strong.
So the al-Saud have become Janus-faced: looking in one direction, the royal family encourages democratic reformers to speak out; looking in the opposite direction, it jails them when they do.
On May 15, in a closed trial without legal representation for the accused, three leading reformers – Ali Al Dumaini, a well-known journalist and poet, and university professors Abdullah Al Hamid and Matruk al Falih – were condemned and sentenced to prison terms ranging from six to nine years.
Their crime was to call for a constitutional monarchy.
The official verdict states that they threatened national unity, challenged those in authority, and incited public opinion against the state while using “foreign,” that is, Western, terminology.
Not long after the September 2001 terrorist attacks in the United States, these liberal reformers joined with 160 other professionals to write and sign a petition to Crown Prince Abdullah asking for reforms.
The petition called for the monarchy to work within constitutionally prescribed limits, and for an independent judiciary.
The reformers believe that such reforms are the only way for Saudi Arabia to survive the threat of violence, instability, and national fragmentation that is looming on its horizon.
Only a constitution, they argue, can restore much needed legitimacy to a political system that is widely perceived as deeply corrupt and inept.
Crown Prince Abdullah, Saudi Arabia’s de facto ruler in place of his incapacitated half-brother King Fahd, is keen to be seen as a champion of reform.
He received these proposals with a warm welcome in January 2003.
But his half-brother and more powerful rival, Prince Naif, the Minister of Interior, ordered the arrests, trial, and imprisonment of 13 reformers in March 2004.
Crown Prince Abdullah offered not a peep of opposition, leaving the reform agenda that he initiated in a political netherworld.
In order to maintain absolutist power and to minimize public anger, the Saudi princes, led by Prince Naif, asked the reformers to sign an agreement that they would never again ask for reform.
Prince Naif bans the very word “reform” from public discourse, because it suggests that there is something wrong with the system; his preferred term is “development.”
Of the thirteen reformers who were arrested, ten submitted to this demand, but the other three refused and have paid the price.
They remained in jail in Riyadh without legal representation until the final verdict.
Those who submitted had their passports withdrawn, lost their jobs, and were forbidden to speak to the press.
Under regional and international pressure, the Saudi ruling family has constructed a Potemkin village of reform while retaining absolute control over all political developments.
Earlier this year, they staged partial, and tightly regulated municipal elections, with no independent opinion permitted to influence when and how the ballots were held.
These entire female population was excluded, and only one-quarter of the male population was eligible to vote.
Inevitably, Wahhabi Islamists did best.
The al-Saud face two threats: one from violent Islamists, and the other from liberal reformers.
There is every indication that they fear the reformers far more.
Perhaps the princes believe that it is easier to kill “terrorist” criminals than to crush demands for social justice.
Indeed, killing violent Islamists and al-Qaeda affiliates is applauded by the international community, especially the United States, as success in the “war on terrorism.”
But as they hunt down and kill violent domestic extremists, they are quietly tightening the noose around all those who want moderate reform.
This repression of liberal reformers passes unnoticed in the wider world, with America’s silence particularly noticeable.
This silence is vital to the princes, for what the al-Saud care about most is US support.
As things stand in Saudi Arabia, the US administration has no credible ally for change outside of the existing regime.
So, unlike in Ukraine, Georgia, Kyrgizstan, and Lebanon, it does nothing to encourage popular opposition.
As long as the Saudi regime meets America’s oil needs and fights Islamist radicals, it will continue to receive US support and silence – and hence its tacit consent.
But turning a blind eye is shortsighted, for America and for the Saudis.
Those who make peaceful revolutions impossible make violent revolutions inevitable.
The liberal reformers who have been jailed could have paved the way for a peaceful transition to a reformed Saudi Arabia.
By jailing them, the regime has made it clear that violence is the only avenue open to those seeking change.
Algeria’s Dying Dictatorship
ALGIERS – Despite his failing health, Algerian President Abdelaziz Bouteflika won a fourth term last month, with 81% of the vote – or so the regime claimed.
In fact, far from signaling growing political stability, the 77-year-old incumbent’s sham victory underscores just how few options Algerians have to effect change from within the system.
Under Bouteflika’s leadership, Algeria’s government has failed to address the country’s most pressing economic and social challenges.
And there is no reason to expect this to change.
Since suffering a stroke last year, Bouteflika has barely appeared in public, whether to campaign ahead of the vote or to acknowledge his victory after it.
As a result, the regime is finding it increasingly difficult to claim, as it has for the last 15 years, that Bouteflika’s leadership represents civilian control over the military.
So it has devised a new strategy, aimed at creating a sense of transition: the constitution will be revised to designate a vice president as the president’s legitimate successor.
Of course, the move’s true purpose will be to allow the army to rally around the next compliant “civilian leader.”
The regime will also propose a “national contract,” supposedly to initiate a dialogue with the opposition.
But, in the wake of Bouteflika’s bogus victory, the opposition can no longer accept a sham role in the regime’s reform plans.
In fact, the announcement that Bouteflika planned to run was enough to unite Islamists and leftists – even parties that had previously been co-opted by the regime – and spur them to stage a boycott of the vote.
When the election results were announced, they swiftly rejected the new government as illegitimate.
But, to gain credibility, the opposition parties will have to extend their criticism beyond Bouteflika to the system as a whole.
This has become crucial to their survival, as younger opponents are seeking new ways to bring about political change outside state-controlled politics.
One important development is the growing influence of non-partisan voices of dissent.
Non-violent movements have formed to protest not only Bouteflika’s continued leadership, but also the pervasive role of the army and intelligence services in civil society.
Such movements, like the much-publicized “Barakat” (“Enough”), have encouraged a shift among Algerians from resentful abstention to active boycott.
Underground unions – which mount demonstrations and strikes to protect workers’ rights, while refusing to cooperate with the regime’s official unions – have also criticized the election.
Moreover, young people have assumed a prominent role in opposition efforts, such as by disrupting Bouteflika’s campaign rallies.
Demonstrations by unemployed young people in southern Algeria, the center of the oil industry, drew a direct link between high unemployment and the military’s control of the country’s natural resources.
By organizing peaceful protests to demand accountability for public spending, these movements are raising issues that were not addressed during the election campaign.
More immediately, they are also challenging the government’s ban on street demonstrations – a vestige of the state of emergency that lasted from 1992 until 2011.
With the civil war of the 1990’s long over, security officials cannot explain why Algerians are being arrested for demanding jobs.
Of course, repression continues to intimidate many Algerians.
But it is becoming increasingly easy to rouse their sympathy for their fellow citizens through Twitter, YouTube, and Facebook.
By stimulating daily public debate about local human-rights violations, they spread the message of discontent more efficiently than traditional parties ever have.
By demanding better state services, rather than an “Arab Spring,” Algerians have walked a fine line, highlighting the regime’s inability to deliver security and economic prosperity, despite its efforts to stifle all debate.
Thus, even without explicitly talking about politics, ordinary Algerians are mobilizing in growing numbers against the government.
The majority of street protests have occurred in the most deprived and neglected areas, and the primary demands have been economic: better jobs, housing, health-care services, and infrastructure.
For some, the right to make a living through the informal market would be sufficient.
And demonstrators have gone to great – sometimes destructive – lengths to be heard, blocking roads, occupying factories and government buildings, and sabotaging water and electricity infrastructure.
More than 150 Algerians have even set themselves on fire since 2011, usually in front of public services buildings.
In this context, the failure of the government’s half-baked attempts to buy off protesters is unsurprising.
In 2011, the government, fearing contagion from Tunisia and Egypt, where long-established dictatorships had just been toppled, responded to the spread of protests by public-sector workers by raising their salaries by 100% – retroactively to 2008.
But the plan backfired; protests intensified, with other workers demonstrating for similar benefits and railing against the inflation that the move engendered.
To be sure, street protests have already had a profound impact on Algeria’s authoritarian politics, with official fears of massive uprisings affecting public budgets and political appointments.
But the decision to prolong Bouteflika’s presidency will not provide the kind of strong, transformational leadership that Algeria needs to materialize the regime’s stability promises. 
The Algerian authorities face a major challenge, because rejection of pluralist institutions makes it more difficult to find negotiating partners.
The more the regime tries to buy off the protesters, the more overweening it appears – and the angrier citizens become.
And the enraged younger generation, in particular, is not especially fearful of losing the limited benefits offered by the status quo.
America After the Election
NEW YORK – The ongoing presidential campaign in the United States stands out for its lack of civility and the vast differences between the candidates: the anti-establishment businessman Donald Trump on the Republican side and the polished politician Hillary Clinton representing the Democrats.
The contest has exposed deep fault lines within American society and damaged the country’s global reputation.
No surprise, then, that one of the few things Americans seem to agree on is that the campaign has gone on for too long.
But soon it will be over.
The question is: what comes next?
Polls suggest that Clinton, a former senator and secretary of state, will defeat the controversial Trump.
But polls are not to be confused with reality.
After all, going into June’s Brexit referendum, most observers believed that a victory for “Remain” was a sure thing.
More recently, Colombian voters rejected a peace accord that was widely expected to receive popular approval.
All of this is to say that, while a Clinton victory may be likely, it is no certainty.
The only poll that counts is the one on November 8.
Until then, all we can do is speculate.
Yet some predictions can be made with greater confidence.
There is little doubt that the US will emerge from this election a divided country with a divided government, regardless of who is president or which party has a majority in either chamber of Congress.
Neither Democrats nor Republicans will be able to realize their objectives without at least some support from the other.
But no one should think that the only divide in American politics is between Republicans and Democrats.
In fact, splits within the two major parties are just as deep, with large and highly motivated factions pulling each to their respective extremes – Democrats to the left and Republicans to the right.
This makes compromise on centrist positions all the more difficult to achieve.
The rapid resumption of presidential politics will undermine compromise further.
If Clinton wins, many Republicans will assume that it was only because of Trump’s flaws, and they will judge her likely to be a one-term president.
A country favoring change, they will conclude, is unlikely to keep a Democrat in the Oval Office for a fourth term.
Many Republicans (especially those who deny the legitimacy of a Clinton victory) will thus seek to frustrate her administration, lest she be able to run again in 2020 as a successful incumbent.
Similarly, if Trump manages to win, most Democrats (and even some Republicans) will – after recovering from their surprise and dismay – make it their highest priority to ensure that he does not have an opportunity for a second term.
Given how much of Trump’s agenda his fellow policymakers would likely find objectionable, governing would be very difficult during his administration.
In either scenario, it may still be possible to make progress in a few key areas.
The next US government might manage to enact legislation to fund the modernization of America’s aging infrastructure, a policy that both candidates and many in Congress favor.
It might also be able to cobble together a majority to reform the US tax code – in particular, lowering the high rate for corporations and raising taxes on the wealthy.
There could even be some reform of health care, President Barack Obama’s signature achievement, owing to serious implementation problems with the current system.
But other issues requiring cooperation between Congress and the president are unlikely to be addressed any time soon.
One is immigration reform, which is as controversial in the US as it is in Europe.
Another is trade: because the domestic political environment makes policymakers wary of supporting positions with dedicated opponents, both Trump and Clinton oppose the Trans-Pacific Partnership, even though its ratification would benefit America’s economy and strategic standing.
Meanwhile, America’s deficit and debt are certain to rise, as there seems to be little or no will to reduce entitlement spending.
The foreign-policy implications of the election are somewhat different, because, under the US Constitution, the president enjoys considerable latitude.
While only Congress can officially declare war or ratify treaties, presidents may use (or refuse to use) military force without explicit congressional approval.
They can also enter into international agreements other than treaties, appoint powerful White House staff, and change US foreign policy by executive action, as Obama recently did regarding Cuba.
Under Clinton, this discretion could translate into establishing one or more safe areas in Syria, providing more defensive arms to Ukraine, and taking a tougher line toward North Korea as it continues its nuclear and missile buildup.
It is more difficult to guess what Trump would do.
He is, after all, a political outsider, so no one knows how much of his campaign rhetoric would be translated into policy.
Still, one could anticipate a Trump administration distancing itself from some traditional allies in Europe and Asia and standing mostly aloof from the Middle East.
What exactly will happen to America after the presidential election remains an open question.
Though some outcomes can reasonably be expected, the only genuine certainty is that the 96% of the world’s population that does not vote in US elections will feel the effects no less than Americans will.
America and Europe
Deeply frustrated by the Bush administration’s policies, many people and governments in Europe hope for a fundamental change in American foreign policy after the upcoming presidential election.
But it would take a medium-sized political miracle for these hopes not to be disappointed, and such a miracle will not happen – whoever is elected.
The Bush administration made numerous foreign-policy blunders with far-reaching consequences.
But Bush neither invented American unilateralism nor triggered the transatlantic rift between the United States and Europe.
To be sure, Bush reinforced both trends, but their real causes lie in objective historical factors, namely America’s being the sole world power since 1989 and Europe’s self-inflicted weakness.
As long as America remains the sole world power, the next US President will be neither able nor willing to change the basic framework of America’s foreign policy.
It will, of course, be important who wins the presidency: a candidate expected to continue Bush’s foreign policy or someone ready for a new beginning.
In the former case, the transatlantic rift will deepen dramatically.
Four, or even eight, more years of US policy à la Bush would inflict such damage on the substance of the transatlantic alliance as to threaten its very existence.
But if America’s next president is committed to a new direction, US foreign policy might again become more multilateral, more focused on international institutions and alliances, and willing to bring the relationship between military force and diplomacy back to within its historical proportions.
That is the good news.
The bad news is that, even under such auspicious conditions, the US, as a world power, will not relinquish its “free-hand” policy or forget its strength and its claim to preeminence among nations.
Another piece of bad (or good?) news is that a more multilateral American policy will increase the pressure on Europeans to take on more responsibility for international crisis management and conflict resolution – in Afghanistan, Iran, Iraq, the Middle East, Transcaucasia, and Russia, and with respect to Turkey’s future.
To this common agenda, the Europeans should add Africa, climate change, and reform of the United Nations and the world trading system.
For a long time, Europe has underestimated its weight and importance.
Europe’s geopolitical, economic, and social weight is quite obvious.
But Europe’s integration of sovereign states’ interests by means of common institutions could also be an example for much of the world.
In particular, the way Europe, in the process of its enlargement, has projected its power to achieve lasting peace across the whole continent, and fostered development by integrating entire economies, states, and societies within its institutional framework, could become a model for shaping a cooperative world order in the twenty-first century.
This modern, progressive, and peaceful model is unique and superior to all other currently available approaches to the fundamental questions of political order.
But could doesn’t mean will.
Europe’s global influence is feeble because of its internal quarrels and lack of unity, which render the European Union weak and limit its ability to act.
Objectively strong, subjectively infirm – that is how the EU’s present condition can be described.
The current moment of American weakness coincides with a substantially changed international political environment, defined largely by the limits of US power, Europe’s ineffectiveness, and the emergence of new global giants like China and India.
In light of these developments, does it still make sense to speak of “the West”?
I believe it does, more than ever, because the rift between Europe and America leaves both sides substantially weaker in global terms.
The unilateral overstretching of American power offers a chance for a new beginning in US-European relations.
America, more than in the past, will depend on strong partners and will seek such partnerships.
So what are the Europeans waiting for?
Why not start now to overcome the traditional tension between NATO and the EU – especially as French policy toward NATO under President Nicolas Sarkozy has been moving in the right direction?
A regular mutual presence of the Secretary General of NATO and of the head of EU foreign policy in the councils of both organizations doesn’t require much time and effort.
Why not initiate EU-US consultations at a high political level (with the Secretary-General of NATO participating in security matters) – for instance, by inviting the US Secretary of State and other members of the administration, such as the Treasury Secretary or the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, to sit several times a year on the appropriate EU Council meetings?
Why not have routine annual meetings between the European Council and the US President?
Periodic meetings between the appropriate committees of the US Congress and the European Parliament would also be of great importance, as ultimately both bodies will have to ratify any international treaties.
The fate of the Kyoto Protocol should be a lesson to all parties involved.
No such US-EU consultations would require any new agreements, so they could start without any further preliminaries.
There is one certainty that Europeans can take home from the US election campaign even today: with a more multilaterally oriented US foreign policy, Europe won’t be riding comfortably in the US world-political slipstream much longer.
And that is a good thing.
The new transatlantic formula must be greater say in decision-making in exchange for a greater share of responsibility.
America at Stall Speed?
NEWPORT BEACH – Judging from the skittishness of both markets and “consensus expectations,” the United States’ economic prospects are confusing.
One day, the country is on the brink of a double-dip recession; the next, it is on the verge of a turbo-charged recovery, powered by resilient consumers and US multinationals starting to deploy, at long last, their massive cash reserves.
In the process, markets take investors on a wild rollercoaster ride, with the European crisis (riddled with even more confusion and volatility) serving to aggravate their queasiness.
This situation is both understandable and increasingly unsettling for America’s well-being and that of the global economy.
It reflects the impact of fundamental (and historic) economic and financial re-alignments, insufficient policy responses, and system-wide rigidities that frustrate structural change.
As a result, there are now legitimate questions about the underlying functioning of the US economy and, therefore, its evolution in the months and years ahead.
One way to understand current conditions – and what is needed to improve them – is to consider two events that recently attracted considerable worldwide attention: the launch of Boeing’s Dreamliner passenger jet and the tragic death of Apple’s Steve Jobs.
Let us start with some simple aeronautic dynamics, using an analogy that my PIMCO colleague, Bill Gross, came up with to describe the economic risks facing the American economy.
For the Dreamliner to take off, ascend, and maintain a steady altitude, it must do more than move forward.
It has to move forward fast enough to exceed critical physical thresholds, which are significantly higher than those for most of Boeing’s other (smaller) planes.
Failure would mean succumbing to a mid-air stall, with tepid forward motion giving way to a sudden loss of altitude.
Unless we are convinced of the Dreamliner’s ability to avoid stall speed, it makes no sense to talk about all the ways in which it will enhance the travel experience for millions of people around the world.
America’s economy today risks stall speed.
Specifically, the question is not whether it can grow, but whether it can grow fast enough to propel a large economy that, according to the US Federal Reserve, faces “balance-sheet deleveraging, credit constraints, and household and business uncertainty about the economic outlook.”
And, remember, it is just over a year since certain US officials were proclaiming the economy’s “summer of recovery” – a view underpinned by the erroneous belief that America was reaching “escape velocity.”
Stall speed is a terrifying risk for an economy like that of the US, which desperately needs to grow robustly.
Without rapid growth, there is no way to reverse persistently high and increasingly structural (and therefore protracted) unemployment; safely de-leverage over-indebted balance sheets; and prevent already-disturbing income and wealth inequalities from growing worse.
The private sector alone cannot and will not counter the risk of stall speed.
What is desperately needed is better policymaking.
Specifically, policymakers must be open and willing to understand the unusual challenges facing the US economy, react accordingly, and possess sufficiently potent policy instruments.
Unfortunately, this has been far from the case in America (and in Europe, where the situation is worse).
Moreover, US policymakers in the last few weeks have been more interested in pointing fingers at Europe and China than in recognizing and responding to the paradigm shifts that are at the root of the country’s economic problems and mounting social challenges.
This is where the insights of Steve Jobs, one of the world’s best innovators and entrepreneurs, come in.
Jobs did more than navigate paradigm shifts; he essentially created them.
He was a master at converting the complicated into the simple; and, rather than being paralyzed by complexity, he found new ways to deconstruct and overcome it.
Teamwork was an obligation, not a choice.
And he eschewed the search for the single “big bang” in favor of aiming for multiple breakthroughs.
Underlying it all was a willingness to evolve – a drive for perfection through experimentation.
Moreover, he excelled at selling to audiences worldwide both his vision and his strategy for realizing it.
So far, America’s economic policymakers have fallen short on all of these fronts.
Rather than committing to a comprehensive set of urgently-needed reinforcing measures, they seem obsessed with the futile search for the one “killer app” that will solve all of the country's economic problems.
No surprise that they have yet to find it.
Teamwork has repeatedly fallen hostage to turf wars and political bickering.
Little has been done to deconstruct structural complexity, let alone win sufficient public support for a medium-term vision, a credible implementation strategy, and a set of measures that is adequate to the task at hand.
The longer the policymaking impasse persists, the greater the stall-speed risk for an economy that already has an unemployment crisis, a large budget deficit, many underwater mortgages, and policy interest rates floored at zero.
This is an atmosphere in which unhealthy balance sheets come under even greater pressure, and healthy investors refuse to engage.
In the process, the risk of recession remains uncomfortably high, the unemployment crisis deepens, and inequities rise as already-stretched social safety nets prove even more porous.
America, China, and the Productivity Paradox
NEW HAVEN – In the late 1980s, there was intense debate about the so-called productivity paradox – when massive investments in information technology (IT) were not delivering measureable productivity improvements.
That paradox is now back, posing a problem for both the United States and China – one that may well come up in their annual Strategic and Economic Dialogue.
Back in 1987, Nobel laureate Robert Solow famously quipped, “You can see the computer age everywhere except in the productivity statistics.”
The productivity paradox seemed to be resolved in the 1990s, when America experienced a spectacular productivity renaissance.
Average annual productivity growth in the country’s nonfarm business sector accelerated to 2.5% from 1991 to 2007, from the 1.5% trend in the preceding 15 years.
The benefits of the Internet Age had finally materialized.
Concern about the paradox all but vanished.
But the celebration appears to have been premature.
Despite another technological revolution, productivity growth is slumping again.
And this time the downturn is global in scope, affecting the world’s two largest economies, the US and China, most of all.
Over the past five years, from 2010 to 2014, annual US productivity growth has fallen to an average of 0.9%.
It actually fell at a 2.6% annual rate in the two most recent quarters (in late 2014 and early 2015).
Barring a major data revision, America’s productivity renaissance seems to have run into serious trouble.
China is witnessing a similar pattern.
Although the government does not publish regular productivity statistics, there is no mistaking the problem: Overall urban employment growth has been steady, at around 13.2 million workers per year since 2013 – well in excess of the government’s targeted growth rate of ten million.
Moreover, hiring seems to be holding at that brisk pace in early 2015.
At the same time, output growth has slowed from the 10% trend of the 33 years ending in 2011 to around 7% today.
That downshift, in the face of sustained rapid job creation, implies an unmistakable deceleration of productivity.
Therein lies the latest paradox.
With revolutionary technologies now driving the creation of new markets (digital media and computerized wearables), services (energy management and DNA sequencing), products (smartphones and robotics), and technology companies (Alibaba and Apple), surely productivity growth must be surging.
As a modern-day Solow might say, the ���Internet of Everything” is everywhere except in the productivity statistics.
But is there really a paradox?
Northwestern University’s Robert Gordon has argued that IT- and Internet-led innovations like automated high-speed data processing and e-commerce pale in comparison to the breakthroughs of the Industrial Revolution, including the steam engine, electricity, and indoor plumbing.
He maintains that, although these innovations led to dramatic transformations of the major advanced economies – such as higher female labor-force participation, increased transportation speed, urbanization, and normalized temperature control – these changes will be extremely hard to replicate.
Indeed, as taken with today’s revolutionary technologies as we are – I say this staring at my sleek new Apple Watch – I am sympathetic to Gordon’s argument.
If US productivity figures are to be taken at anything close to face value – a persistently sluggish trend interrupted by a 16-year spurt that now appears to have faded – it is possible that all America has accomplished are transitional efficiency improvements associated with the IT-enabled shift from one technology platform to another.
Optimists maintain that the official statistics fail to capture marked quality-of-life improvements, which may be true, especially in the light of promising advances in biotechnology and online education.
But this overlooks a much more important aspect of the productivity-measurement critique: the undercounting of work time associated with the widespread use of portable information appliances.
In the US, the Bureau of Labor Statistics estimates that the length of the average workweek has held steady at about 34 hours since the advent of the Internet two decades ago.
Yet nothing could be further from the truth: knowledge workers continually toil outside the traditional office, checking their email, updating spreadsheets, writing reports, and engaging in collective brainstorming.
Indeed, white-collar knowledge workers – that is, most workers in advanced economies – are now tethered to their workplaces essentially 24 hours a day, seven days a week, a reality that is not reflected in the official statistics.
Productivity growth is not about working longer; it is about generating more output per unit of labor input.
Any undercounting of output pales in comparison with the IT-assisted undercounting of working hours.
China’s productivity slowdown is probably more benign.
It is an outgrowth of the Chinese economy’s nascent structural transformation from capital-intensive manufacturing to labor-intensive services.
Indeed, it was only in 2013 that services supplanted manufacturing and construction as the economy’s largest sector.
Now the gap is widening, and that is likely to continue.
With Chinese services requiring about 30% more workers per unit of output than manufacturing and construction, combined, the economy’s structural rebalancing is now shifting growth to China’s lower-productivity services sector.
China has time before this becomes a problem.
As Gordon notes, there have been long-lasting productivity dividends associated with urbanization – a trend that could continue for at least another decade in China.
But there will come a time when this tailwind subsides and China begins to converge on the so-called frontier of the advanced economies.
At that point, China will face the same productivity challenges that confront America and others.
Chinese policymakers’ new focus on innovation-led growth seems to recognize this risk.
Without powerful innovations, sustaining productivity growth will be an uphill battle.
China’s recent shift to a slower-productivity trajectory is an early warning of what may well be one of its most daunting economic challenges.
There is no escaping the key role that productivity growth plays in any country’s economic performance.
Yet, for advanced economies, periods of sustained rapid productivity growth have been the exception, not the rule.
Recent signs of slowing productivity growth in both the US and China underscore this reality.
For a world flirting with secular stagnation, that is disturbing news, to say the least.
A New Blueprint for US-China Relations
NEW YORK – In the coming decades, nothing will matter more for global peace, prosperity, and governance than how the United States and China handle the ongoing shift in their relative power.
In the long term, today’s other pressing challenges – including Russia’s relationship with the West and events in the tumultuous Middle East – will amount almost to sideshows by comparison.
What makes the Sino-American relationship dangerous is that powerful forces in both countries seem intent on a collision course.
On the Chinese side, under Xi Jinping’s assertive leadership, the government is no longer heeding Deng Xiaoping’s injunction that the country should “hide its strength, bide its time, and never take the lead” in international affairs.
It has pursued manifestly expansionist territorial claims, most notably in the South China Sea, and shown a clear determination to resist the indefinite continuation of American dominance in the region.
The prevailing Chinese mindset is that the US is intent on isolating, containing, and undermining it.
Unhappily, there is plenty of evidence on the US side to feed that sentiment.
Whatever many American policymakers may be saying in private, their public discourse almost invariably reflects an intention to remain the world’s dominant power – and specifically in Asia – in perpetuity.
The most confrontational recent articulation of this position can be found in a report for the Council on Foreign Relations, by Robert Blackwill and Ashley Tellis, arguing that the central objective of American grand strategy must be “preserving US primacy in the global system,” and urging a series of aggressive economic, political, and military measures to “balance” China.
They say this is not a “containment” strategy, but it amounts to nothing less.
Is there another way to manage the relationship that, while reflecting the reality of these forces and mindsets on both sides, would not risk turning legitimate competition into dangerous confrontation?
In a new report for the Harvard Kennedy School’s Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs, Kevin Rudd, former Australian Prime Minister and now head of the Asia Society Policy Institute, outlines just such a strategy, which he calls “constructive realism”.
It’s a clunky label, but his analysis and policy prescriptions are compelling.
The “realist” dimension of Rudd’s argument recognizes that certain areas of disagreement – including Taiwan, territorial disputes in the South and East China Seas, US alliances in Asia, Chinese military modernization, and the legitimacy of China’s political system – will remain intractable for the foreseeable future.
They will defy easy solutions – and thus will require very careful management.
The “constructive” part of Rudd’s thesis argues for systematic collaboration – with the US treating China more as an equal – in tackling a series of other difficult issues at bilateral, regional, and global levels.
Bilaterally, such cooperation might involve an investment treaty, a joint intelligence task force on terrorism, a cyber-security protocol, agreed measures for managing unplanned military incidents, and mutual ratification of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty.
On a regional level, Rudd argues, the US and China could work on joint strategies to denuclearize and, ultimately, reunify the Korean Peninsula; tackle the lingering sore of Japan’s war history; harmonize regional trade agreements; and transform the East Asia Summit into a more complete Asia-Pacific Community.
Globally, Rudd believes that the joint agenda could focus on combating climate change, revitalizing the G-20, further internationalizing the renminbi; giving China a greater role in the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank; and reforming other key international institutions within the UN system.
Some in the West – including veteran China watcher David Shambaugh – remain convinced that this kind of collaborative accommodation will not be necessary, because failures of economic and political management will bring about China’s implosion.
Rudd argues that they are wrong, and that Xi will neither overplay his authoritarian hand nor under-deliver on growth.
China’s rise will continue, and the world – including the US – will have to find principled ways of peacefully accommodating it.
Rudd’s recommendations are undoubtedly ambitious.
But, given his credentials – he is a formidable Chinese linguist and creative policy thinker, with long and close personal relationships with key figures in both the US and China – his argument must be taken seriously.
Indeed, though Rudd’s tenure as Australia’s prime minister was anything but smooth, his sheer force of intellect is unmatched by that of any public figure with whom I have interacted over the last 30 years.
(Not that this will much help his evident willingness to be drafted as the next UN Secretary-General: in that role the major powers have always preferred bland secretaries to creative generals.)
No American presidential candidate is likely to be comfortable talking about the US as anything other than Number One.
But we must hope that in the years ahead we hear less talk of “primacy” and “dominance” and much more about cooperation and collaboration.
It is only with such US policies toward China that the world can begin to be confident that the twenty-first century will not, like the last, become a vale of tears.
America Confronts Old and New Europe
US Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld's petulant remark of last year about "old and new Europe" was right for the wrong reasons.
He meant it to refer to Europe's divisions, but in May, ten additional states joined the European Union.
The expanded Europe truly forms a new Europe.
Should America be nervous?
Fifty-four years after the announcement of the Schuman Plan that began to knit together the economies of France and Germany, the EU now has 25 countries and a population larger than that of the United States.
Eight of the new members are former Communist countries that were locked behind the Iron Curtain for nearly half a century.
Their attraction to the Union is a sign of the appeal - the "soft power" - of the idea of European unification.
Of course, this new Europe faces many problems.
The per capita income of the new countries is less than half of that of the fifteen members they are joining. Concerns have been raised about the influx of cheap labor.
But average GDP growth rates in the new members are twice as high as in the original members, and this can provide a welcome stimulus to stagnant labor markets and sluggish economies.
Political arrangements are somewhat more problematic.
Negotiations are underway to revise a draft EU constitution.
Some Europeans worry that the constitution will enable courts to carry the integration process further and faster than public opinion in member states will tolerate.
Lack of grassroots support might lead to rejection of the constitution in countries like Britain, where referenda have been promised before the new arrangements come into force.
Across the Atlantic, most Americans (to the extent they pay attention) regard these changes with general approval.
But some express concern that the new Europe will be defined in opposition to the US.
Not only do the remarks of French leaders about recreating a multi-polar world arouse alarm, but recent public opinion polls show a decline in the popularity of the US among Europeans and a desire for more independent policies.
The Iraq War proved costly to American soft power, with the US losing about 30 percentage points of attractiveness on average in Europe, including in countries like Britain, Spain, and Italy, whose governments supported the war.
The recent photographs of detainees being abused and sexually degraded in Baghdad's Abu Ghraib prison added fuel to the fire.
Now some American neo-conservatives argue that the US should drop its longstanding support for European integration.
Such a policy change would be a serious mistake.
Not only would it add to anti-American attitudes and fail to accomplish its objectives, but it over-estimates the extent to which the new Europe is being formed in opposition to the US.
Whatever the rhetoric in France, for example, the policies and attitudes in countries such as Britain or Poland demonstrate that good trans-Atlantic relations can be maintained.
If anything, the risks of a US-Europe split will be reduced rather than increased by the EU's recent enlargement.
Moreover, there are several objective reasons why the current friction between Europe and the US is unlikely to lead to divorce.
Europe and America also share a common structure of economic interests and values.
While trade produces frictions in democracies, it also enhances wealth.
If one looks at foreign direct investment, it is clear that the two sides of the Atlantic are closely integrated.
In terms of values, while some differences exist between Europe and America, at the fundamental level of democracy and human rights, no other two parts of the globe share more.
As the writer Robert Kagan concluded in the revision of his book in which he declared Europeans to be from Venus and Americans from Mars, it turns out that Americans seeking democratic legitimization of their policies and self-images cannot escape Europe.
In short, it is good for Americans - and for the world - that old and new Europe are becoming one.
We can all benefit from the soft power of an enlarged Europe.
What Makes America Great
CAMBRIDGE – Presidential inaugurations and commencement ceremonies are usually very emotional events.
They are rites of passage that mark both an end and a new beginning in the life of a country or an individual.
As a professor at Harvard’s Kennedy School of Government, I attend our commencement ceremony every year.
Despite this regularity, I still become emotional as I see my students complete a phase of their lives and contemplate their future.
One of the highlights of our ceremony is a video in which several professors and public personalities read, line by line, John F. Kennedy’s inaugural address.
It is a text written 56 years ago, in a different world, where the Cold War, the threat of nuclear Armageddon, and the challenges faced by so many newly independent poor states dominated policymakers’ concerns.
And yet, running at under 14 minutes, it never fails to move and inspire everyone in the audience, including that half of the graduates and their families who hail from other countries, near and far.
To understand why, it is useful to recall a few of the most famous passages.
For starters, there was Kennedy’s vow to defend freedom for its friends and from its enemies: “Let every nation know, whether it wishes us well or ill, that we shall pay any price, bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose any foe to assure the survival and the success of liberty.”
There was also his commitment to fight poverty: “To those people in the huts and villages of half the globe struggling to break the bonds of mass misery, we pledge our best efforts to help them help themselves, for whatever period is required – not because the communists may be doing it, not because we seek their votes, but because it is right.
If a free society cannot help the many who are poor, it cannot save the few who are rich.”
And this commitment was part and parcel of hemispheric solidarity: “To our sister republics south of our border, we offer a special pledge – to convert our good words into good deeds – in a new alliance for progress – to assist free men and free governments in casting off the chains of poverty.”
Finally, there was Kennedy’s ethic of service on behalf of the commonwealth: “And so, my fellow Americans: ask not what your country can do for you – ask what you can do for your country.
My fellow citizens of the world: ask not what America will do for you, but what together we can do for the freedom of man.”
These words’ enduring emotional appeal is rooted in their embrace of a potentially difficult course of action, motivated by a pledge to uphold values shared by citizens of America and the world alike.
It was this approach – one founded on a value-based system of rules, not on individual deals – that enabled the US to create and sustain a coalition of countries that could maintain peace and international cooperation.
Fast forward to today.
President-elect Donald Trump’s campaign narrative was based on the assumption that the US has fallen from its former greatness.
Jobs have moved to Mexico and China because weak leaders negotiated bad deals.
Immigrants, mostly illegal, have taken the few jobs that remain, killing and raping in their free time.
It follows that the US needs a president who will put America first and knows how to extract the best deals for it at every opportunity, using the country’s full might to advance its interests.
I doubt that an inaugural address based on these ideas will awe and inspire many audiences at commencement ceremonies, especially where many of those in attendance are citizens of other countries.
Such a speech will encourage no one to “bear any burden” for the sake of any universal principle or challenge, be it human rights or global warming.
It will not exhort us to focus on something bigger than ourselves.
Over the course of history, very few powerful states have developed a sense of themselves as being based not on ethnic heritage, but on a set of values that all citizens can live by.
For the US, it was “life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.”
For the Soviet Union, it was international proletarian solidarity – “workers of the world, unite.”
The European Union is based on universal values and principles that are so attractive that 28 countries have opted to join it; and, Brexit notwithstanding, some half-dozen more are trying to get in.
By contrast, a great and powerful Russia or China today – or the Third Reich in its time – may be able to garner the support of its citizens; but such states cannot constitute the basis of an international order that others find appealing, because they are based on a vision of themselves that does not encompass others.
The basis of America’s greatness and ability to lead the world stems from universal values that underpin a set of rules that uphold the others’ rights, not an America that tries to base its greatness on a set of deals aimed at getting the better of others.
Such an America will find its ability to lead the world compromised by a shortage of goodwill and an abundance of distrust.
Other countries will huddle together to protect themselves from the US bully.
If Trump really wants to make America great again, he should ponder how his inaugural address will sound to a global audience 56 years from now.
Will it inspire the Class of 2073 the way Kennedy’s address still inspires graduates today?
America Goes from Teacher to Student
Cambridge &#45;&#45; As the United States’ epic financial crisis continues to unfold, one can only wish that US policymakers were half as good at listening to advice from developing countries as they are at giving it.
Americans don’t seem to realize that their “sub-prime” mortgage meltdown has all too much in common with many previous post-1945 banking crises throughout the world.
The silver lining is that there are many highly distinguished current and former policymakers out there, particularly from emerging market countries, who have seen this movie before.
If US policymakers would only listen, they might get an idea or two about how to deal with financial crises from experts who have lived through them and come out safely on the other side.
Unfortunately, the parallel between today’s US crisis and previous financial crises is not mere hyperbole.
The qualitative parallels are obvious: banks using off-balance loans to finance highly risky ventures, exotic new financial instruments, and excessive exuberance over the promise of new markets.
But there are strong quantitative parallels as well.
Professor Carmen Reinhart of the University of Maryland and I systematically compared the run-up to the US sub-prime crisis with the run-up to the 19 worst financial crises in the industrialized world over the past 60 years.
These include epic crises in the Scandinavian countries, Spain, and Japan, along with lesser events such as the US savings and loan crises of the 1980’s.
Across virtually all the major indicators – including equity and housing price runs-ups, trade balance deficits, surges in government and household indebtedness, and pre-crisis growth trajectories – red lights are blinking for the US.
Simply put, surging capital flows into the US artificially held down interest rates and inflated asset prices, leading to laxity in banking and regulatory standards and, ultimately, to a meltdown.
When Asia and Latin America had their financial meltdowns in the 1990’s and early 2000’s, they took advice not only from the IMF, but also from a number of small panels composed of eminent people representing diverse backgrounds and experiences.
The US should do the same.
The head of the IMF, Frenchman Dominique Strauss-Kahn, could easily select a superb panel from any range of former crisis countries, including Mexico, Brazil, Korea, Turkey, Japan, and Sweden, not to mention Argentina, Russia, Chile, and many others.
Admittedly, the IMF’s panel would have to look past America’s current hypocrisy.
The US Treasury strongly encouraged Asia to tighten fiscal policy during its 1990’s crisis.
But today the US Congress and President are tripping over themselves to adopt an ill-advised giant fiscal stimulus package, whose main effects will be to tie the hands of the next president in simplifying the US tax code and closing the budget deficit.
Americans firmly told Japan that the only way to clean up its economy was to purge insolvent banks and regenerate the financial system through Schumpeterian “creative destruction.”
Today, US authorities appear willing to contemplate any measure, no matter how inflationary, to insure that none of its major banks and investment houses fails.
For years, foreign governments complained about American hedge funds, arguing that their non-transparent behavior posed unacceptable risks to stability.
Now, many US politicians are complaining about the transparency of sovereign wealth funds (big government investors mainly from Asia and the Middle East), which are taking shares in trophy American assets such as Citibank and Merrill Lynch.
In fact, having countries like Russia and China more vested in the well-being of the US economy would not be a bad thing.
Yes, the IMF ought to develop a voluntary code of conduct for SWF’s, but it should not be used as a weapon to enforce financial protectionism.
For years, I, along with many others, have complained that emerging markets need greater representation in global financial governance.
Today, the issue goes far beyond symbolism.
The US economy is in trouble, and the problems it spins off are unlikely to stop at the US border.
Experts from emerging markets and elsewhere have much to say about dealing with financial crises.
America should start to listen before it is too late.
Obamacare and Effective Government
BERKELEY – When historians look back on the United States’ Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA), President Barack Obama’s controversial 2010 health-care reform, we predict that they will not devote much attention to its regulations, its troubled insurance exchanges, or its website’s flawed launch.
Instead, we think that they will focus on how “Obamacare” encouraged a wave of innovation that gradually tamed the spiraling costs of a dysfunctional system, even as millions of previously excluded Americans gained access to health insurance.
Innovation is probably the least discussed aspect of health-care reform.
Yet it is crucial to “bending” the sector’s cost curve, because it enables the delivery of quality health care in cost-effective ways.
Obamacare has provided powerful new incentives for such innovation.
From 1980 to 2010, US health-care spending grew almost twice as fast as the economy, rising from 9.2% to 17.4% of GDP.
While many factors contributed to this surge, most experts agree that the single most important cause was a fee-for-service system that rewarded health-care providers for billing as many services as possible, rather than for keeping people healthy and treating their illnesses efficiently.
The ACA has been changing that, by establishing myriad new incentives to foster efficiency in health-care delivery – for example, by reducing costly and unnecessary hospital infections and readmissions, and by adopting electronic health records.
Most important, the ACA is providing incentives for the creation of “affordable care organizations,” “bundled payment systems,” and other delivery innovations to encourage better coordination of care, especially for patients with numerous chronic conditions.
Such patients are among the 10% who account for an estimated 64% of overall health care costs.
Around the US, providers, insurers, non-profits, and local governments are responding to the ACA’s incentives.
The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (which provide health insurance to pensioners and the poor) has just announced its second round of grants – $665 million to 28 states, three territories, and the District of Columbia – to encourage innovations in health-care delivery.
Of course, it is still too early to declare victory, but Obamacare seems to be working.
According to a recent analysis by the Council of Economic Advisers (CEA), about ten million people gained health insurance coverage in 2014 as a result of the ACA – the largest increase in coverage in four decades.
But the real surprise is that growth in health-care spending slowed dramatically from 2010 to 2013, to roughly the same pace as GDP growth.
This represented a sharp break from the previous half-century; indeed, this period was characterized by the slowest growth in real per capita health-care spending on record.
To be sure, the ACA is only one factor in this promising trend; growth in health-care spending often slows in the wake of an economic downturn.
But Medicare spending, which is not affected by recessions, has slowed along with private health-care spending.
In a recent study, the CEA concluded that the ACA’s Medicare reforms account for a significant share of the slowdown.
The ACA is an example of how government can promote innovation to address major societal challenges by providing goals, directions, and incentives, rather than dictating solutions.
The government plays a role akin to that of a venture capitalist providing seed money and financial support to foster innovation.
In this scenario, different players – Medicare and Medicaid, state and local governments, private insurers, physicians, and social entrepreneurs – collaborate to hammer out effective solutions that can be scaled with government revenues.
For example, responding to the ACA’s incentives and flexibility, Arkansas and Oregon have launched bold experiments to revamp Medicaid, in part by rewarding health-care providers who deliver better outcomes and keep patients healthier.
In Camden, New Jersey, Jeffrey Brenner, a family doctor, has pioneered strategies to reduce hospital stays by “super-utilizers,” a small share of Medicaid patients who are frequently admitted for expensive acute care.
Brenner mapped “hot spots” around Camden, and sought to find out why people in some areas ran up such huge bills.
The problem was not fraud. It was an absence of coordinated medical care, especially basic primary care, and a lack of attention to people’s underlying risk factors.
The most expensive 1% of patients, those with a tangle of issues, accounted for 30% of Camden’s public health-care spending.
Brenner’s Camden Coalition of Healthcare Providers, founded in 2003, received its first funding from a philanthropy, the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, and a private insurer, United Health Care.
The remarkable success in Camden has prompted the foundation to fund similar experiments in Boston, Cleveland, Cincinnati, western Michigan, and Humboldt County, California.
Now the government is providing additional support, with grants to similar programs in Maryland, Colorado, Pennsylvania, and North Carolina.
Oregon has entered into a pay-for-success bargain with the federal government.
The state will receive $1.9 billion over five years to revamp its Medicaid services along the lines of Camden’s approach.
Oregon will get the money only if its per-person Medicaid costs climb substantially more slowly than other states’.
At the moment, Oregon is on track.
Arkansas has moved 20 different “episodes” of health-care delivery (including hip and knee replacements, pregnancy, colonoscopies, asthma, and congestive heart failure) from fee-for-service to paying for quality outcomes.
The results so far are promising – not just by reining in costs, but also by better aligning service delivery with best practices.
The government can spur innovation by offering incentives that tap many different players’ strengths.
In health care, that means taking advantage of the purchasing clout of Medicare and Medicaid, the risk-taking of social entrepreneurs and philanthropists, and the dynamism of markets and private business.
And health-care reform is just one example in which government can deliver what the public wants by setting goals, encouraging creativity, and providing the resources to scale up what works.
Twenty-five years from now, we hope that historians look back on the ACA as the start of a new era of public-private collaboration to develop innovative solutions to complex social problems – and thus to restore trust in government itself.
America’s Second Chance with India
NEW YORK – Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s visit to Washington, DC, in June garnered little public attention outside of India.
Yet diplomats and military professionals in Asia and beyond were certainly watching closely.
For good reason: the rapprochement between the world’s two most populous democracies could shape the world’s future.
It is worth noting that in his address to the US Congress, Modi invoked the word “partner” or “partnership” no fewer than 15 times.
The official joint statement released by the two governments described India as a “Major Defense Partner” of the United States, eligible for advanced technologies with military applications.
The relationship between India and the US has evolved from one of cool distance to strategic proximity in a generation – lightning fast for geopolitics.
The factors underlying this shift merit attention, for many of them are likely to bring the two countries even closer.
The Cold War’s end was a significant part of the bilateral rapprochement, because it eliminated the possibility of India’s continued association with the Soviet Union, as well as its rationale for embracing non-alignment.
A second factor is Pakistan.
For a long time, the US pursued an even-handed policy toward South Asia’s two most strategically important countries.
Nonetheless, during most of the Cold War, Pakistan was seen as a friendly country, whereas its great rival, India, was viewed as difficult.
This view was reinforced when Pakistan became the essential conduit of weapons to Afghans fighting the Soviet occupation of their country.
But the bond between the US and Pakistan weakened when Soviet forces withdrew from Afghanistan in 1989.
Relations suffered further from Pakistan’s development of nuclear weapons, its provision of sanctuary and support to the Taliban, and its willingness to extend hospitality to some of the world’s most dangerous terrorists, including Osama bin Laden.
As a result, US ties to India were no longer constrained by fear of complications in Pakistan.
China is also animating the improvement in India-US ties.
The motivation is far more fundamental than the fact that India and China still have an unresolved border.
China’s rise has created a strong incentive for countries with a stake in Asia to increase their cooperation with the US, as well as with one another, to ensure that they can stand up to China’s political, military, and economic might.
Domestic politics also loom large in the relationship’s development – on both sides.
The decline of India’s Congress party reduced the influence of the political force most associated with maintaining distance from the US.
Meanwhile, there are now more than three million Indian-Americans, and, as with many other immigrant populations, they have become ever more prominent and powerful.
Supporting closer ties with India has become a rare example of bipartisan US foreign policy, and it can be expected to continue regardless of which party controls the White House or Congress after this November’s elections.
The breakthrough in bilateral ties came a decade ago, when the US lifted sanctions introduced in response to India’s nuclear weapons program and then signed an accord paving the way for US involvement in India’s civil nuclear energy program.
India, unlike both Pakistan and North Korea, is seen as a responsible nuclear power, a country the US now supports for membership in various groups designed to stem the further spread of nuclear materials and weapons.
Economic ties are also growing, along with India’s economy.
Bilateral trade has increased to more than $100 billion a year.
High-level visits have become commonplace.
Closer economic ties and large-scale collaboration on clean energy are a high priority.
One can also predict increased cooperation between the two countries’ military and intelligence establishments.
Indeed, joint efforts to keep the Indian Ocean open and safe are already a reality.
The US and India need not be formal allies for their relationship to have the desired effect on Chinese strategic calculations.
Challenges remain, of course.
Bureaucracy, corruption, and poor infrastructure continue to hold back India’s economy.
Indian leaders must also be careful not to do or say things that could alienate the country’s large Muslim minority.
And they must still ensure that close ties with the US are not simply the policy of one prime minister or party.
This means getting the Congress party fully on board and overcoming the resistance of career officials to new ways of thinking and acting.
It is difficult to overlook the irony in much of this.
More than a half-century ago, in the early years of the Cold War, many in Washington saw India as a potential model of non-Communist political and economic development.
For many reasons, things did not work out that way, as India became economically statist, for a time politically authoritarian, and geopolitically closer to the USSR than US officials liked.
Now, however, India is emerging as a successful example of a market-oriented democracy with close ties to the US.
Second chances are rare in life, but both India and the US may be getting just that.
America Keeping Haiti Down
The IDB, the world's largest regional development bank, works in Latin America and the Caribbean purportedly to “contribute to the acceleration of economic and social development.”
Its actions in Haiti, however, have severely undermined those goals.
Roughly $54 million in IDB loans for water infrastructure in Haiti, home to literally the world’s worst water, offered a proven path to preventing deadly water-borne diseases. Designed to assist in fulfilling the right to water in the most impoverished nation in the Western Hemisphere, these loans and the lives they could have saved instead have become pawns in a deliberate political power play.
In 2001, US officials threatened to use their influence to stop previously approved IDB funding unless Haiti’s majority political party submitted to political demands to accept a particular apportionment of seats in a Haitian electoral oversight body.
Soon after, at the behest of the US, instead of disbursing the loans as planned, the IDB and its members took the unprecedented step of implicitly adding conditions to require political action by Haiti before the funds would be released.
These actions violated the IDB’s own charter, which strictly prohibits the Bank and its members from interfering in the internal political affairs of member states.
Internal emails reveal that a US legal counselor inside the IDB proposed to the US Treasury Department that, though the loans faced no legitimate technical obstacles, the US could effectively block them by “slowing” the process.
Indeed, by requesting further review of the loans, Haiti would have to make scheduled payments before the funds were even disbursed.
“While this is not a ‘bullet-proof’ way to stop IDB disbursements,” the counsellor wrote, “it certainly will put a few more large rocks in the road.”  
In 2001, then-US Ambassador to Haiti Dean Curran publicly and explicitly linked the withholding of IDB loans to the demand that Haiti’s political parties reach a compromise that America wanted.
These tactics worked.
Deprived of funds that had already been committed and expected, Haiti fell into arrears on money owed for loan repayment, triggering IDB policies that prevented the Bank from releasing loans.
In subsequent years, the US employed additional delaying tactics, working with the IDB to move the goal posts whenever Haiti appeared to be meeting their demands.
The results have been devastating.
The town of Port-de-Paix, slotted ten years ago by the IDB as the first project site due to its particularly deplorable water situation, has yet to see the implementation of any water projects.
A study conducted by Zanmi Lasante, Partners In Health, the Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Center for Human Rights, and New York University’s Center for Human Rights and Global Justice found no functioning public water sources in the city.
Researchers found three-quarters of water sources in the city contained high levels of coliform bacteria, a key indicator of contamination with fecal matter.
A frightening 15% of households reported symptoms likely related to typhoid.   
If the US and other member states join the IDB and take on the responsibility to improve conditions in the Americas, they cannot then use their membership to undermine the basic rights of the people they claim to serve simply to advance their own political agenda.
The IDB and the US government must take responsibility for their actions and implement the necessary transparency mechanisms to ensure that such abuses do not recur.  Congressional inquiries and annual reviews of the Treasury Department by the Government Accountability Office could provide the oversight necessary to prevent future political misuse of the IDB and its funds.
The people of Haiti, as well as US taxpayers, deserve a system that makes public the status of IDB loans and projects in Haiti in order to ensure that the US and IDB member states uphold their commitments to development and human rights.
Alliances for Peace
WASHINGTON, DC – I grew up in the shadow of World War II, and at the dawn of the Cold War.
My father’s work as a Foreign Service officer gave me an opportunity to see history up close in a searing way: I will never forget walking the beaches of Normandy with him and seeing the burned hulks of Higgins’ boats still on those shores, just a few years after so many young men went to their graves so the world could be free.
Likewise, I will never forget the eerie feeling of riding my bike through the Brandenburg Gate from West Berlin into the East, and seeing the contrast between people who were free and those who were trapped behind the Iron Curtain.
What strikes me now, all these years later, is that a generation of leaders won not only a war, but also the peace.
They did it together.
The United States and our partners worked to create alliances that brought prosperity and stability to Western Europe, Japan, and South Korea.
Old enemies became new allies, and together pioneered a new global economic system that made the world more prosperous.
And even as the Cold War raged, leaders found ways to cooperate on arms control and prevent a nuclear Armageddon.
In short, by building effective and indispensable international institutions and strategic partnerships, we did not just avoid another catastrophic world war; we ultimately ended the Cold War and lifted global living standards for hundreds of millions of people.
That is the remarkable story of the twentieth century.
The question now is what story will emerge from the twenty-first century.
Today, the world order faces new challenges.
Russian aggression is rattling allies.
Extremists who hijack religion threaten governments and people everywhere.
Technology is accelerating a shift in the balance of power between governments and governed that offers both opportunities for democratic accountability and obstacles to inclusive politics.
We have gone from a world where power resided in hierarchies to one where it inhabits networks.
Statecraft has yet to adapt.
The international institutions and partnerships that emerged in the postwar years demand both maintenance and modernization.
In the face of all of this turbulence, some suggest that America should turn inward.
That is nothing new.
Some argued the same after WWII.
They argued it again 25 years ago, after the fall of the Berlin Wall.
They were wrong then – and they are wrong now.
The need for leadership has never been greater, and the US has never been more engaged with the world.
Our role in Afghanistan’s first-ever peaceful, democratic transition reminds us all that, having invested so much blood and treasure in helping to give Afghans a chance to succeed in battle, the world has just as much responsibility to help its leaders succeed in governance.
We know that the destruction of 100% of Syria’s declared chemical weapons would not have happened without direct, hands-on diplomacy and perseverance, just as Syria’s immoral and horrifying civil war will not end without an equal commitment.
So, too, in Asia, where President Barack Obama and Chinese President Xi Jinping just announced ambitious commitments to tackle climate change, we are reminded of what countries can accomplish together with real leadership – and of how much additional leadership is required to conclude a successful climate agreement in Paris next year.
The world has changed, and we are changing with it.
Lines on the map no longer contain the gravest threats, and the players are no longer divided neatly into two camps.
In the twenty-first century, next door is everywhere.
That is why the world needs coalition diplomacy.
No country can defeat terrorism on its own.
No country can solve the existential threat of climate change alone.
No country can eradicate extreme poverty, combat potential pandemics, or improve nuclear security by itself.
None of us can live safer, richer lives by turning our back to the world.
We must build on our history of working with allies by forming new coalitions – with governments, with civil society, and, yes, with everyday people.
A good example is the international effort to confront the Islamic State’s malign brutality in Iraq and Syria.
Political, humanitarian, and intelligence tools from more than 60 countries are being used to support unified military action.
Success depends not on what one or even a handful of countries can do alone, but on what all of us are able to achieve by moving forward together against this common threat.
On an equally important front, the US is working with the United Nations to galvanize a global response to the danger posed by the Ebola virus.
I have personally talked with more than 50 foreign leaders, and we all agree that only by coordinating our actions can we stop the devastation in West Africa and halt Ebola’s spread.
We are making progress on both issues, but much work remains.
Bringing together countries with competing interests and varying resources is hard work.
It demands intense diplomatic engagement and calls upon relationships that have been built and maintained over decades, as well as alliances with new partners.
But by overcoming differences and coordinating efforts to defeat the Islamic State and conquer Ebola, we are reinforcing support for a world order grounded in collective solutions to common problems.
Cooperation is equally vital in reinforcing the bedrock economic principles on which America and other countries built their postwar prosperity.
Frustration cannot grow faster than opportunity in any country.
For example, the negotiations on the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) reflect President Obama’s determination to strike an accord with countries that represent one-third of global trade and 40% of global GDP.
The benefits – for both the US and our partners – are enormous.
Estimates are that the TPP could provide $77 billion a year in real income and support 650,000 new jobs in the US alone.
The Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership being negotiated with the European Union offers another major step toward increasing trade.
Whether for mutual security or shared prosperity, genuine partnerships are not built overnight.
Patient diplomacy and a collective will are needed to advance common goals. America’s objectives remain the same as they have been for decades – peace, prosperity, and stability for the US and for our partners around the world.
Closing the Investment Gap
BERKELEY – The weakness of private investment in the United States and other advanced economies is a worrisome – and perplexing – feature of the recovery from the 2008 global financial crisis.
Indeed, according to the International Monetary Fund, through 2014, private investment declined by an average of 25% compared to pre-crisis trends.
The shortfall in investment has been deep and broad-based, affecting not only residential investment but also investment in equipment and structures.
Business investment remains significantly below pre-2008 expectations, and has been hit hard again in the US during the last year by the collapse of energy-sector investment in response to the steep drop in oil prices.
Interestingly, the investment shortfall in the US coincides with a strong rebound in returns to capital.
By one measure, returns to private capital are now at a higher point than any time in recent decades.
But extensive empirical research confirms that at the macro level, business investment depends primarily on expected future demand and output growth, not on current returns or retained earnings.
According to the IMF, this “accelerator” theory of investment explains most of the weakness of business investment in the developed economies since the 2008 crisis.
In accordance with this explanation, investment growth in the US has been in line with its usual historical relationship with output growth.
In short, private investment growth has been weak primarily because the pace of recovery has been anemic.
Businesses have marked down their pre-crisis investment plans to reflect a post-crisis “new normal” of slower and more uncertain growth in demand for their output.
Under conditions of weak aggregate demand, stronger public investment encourages more private business investment.
But public investment, too, has fallen below pre-crisis expectations, aggravating rather than ameliorating the slump in private investment.
The accelerator explanation of the shortfall in business investment in the US is consistent with evidence that, where projected demand growth has been relatively strong – for example, in cable, telecommunications, digital platforms, social networking, and, until recently, energy – investment growth has also been relatively strong.
Indeed, telecom and cable companies accounted for the largest share of business capital expenditures during the last three years, with energy production and mining second on the list.
Differences in innovation opportunities across industries are also consistent with the changing composition of business investment.
During the 2009-2015 period, while business investment in equipment slowed in the US, it accelerated in intellectual property products, including research and development, software, and so-called artistic originals (the output of artists, studios, and publishers).
R&D investment usually expands faster than GDP during cyclical expansions, and the current period is in line with historical trends.
Indeed, as a share of the economy, R&D investment is now at its highest level on record, which bodes well for future productivity growth.
As the accelerator theory of investment would predict, much R&D investment is occurring in technology-intensive sectors where current and future expected demand has been strong.
There is also evidence that the distribution of returns to capital is becoming increasingly skewed toward these sectors.
According to a recent McKinsey Global Institute report, the most digitized sectors – ranked by 18 metrics on digital assets, digital usage, and digital workforce – enjoy significantly higher profit margins than traditional sectors.
In a recent letter to the chief executives of the S&P 500 companies and large European corporations, Larry Fink, the CEO of BlackRock, the world’s largest investment management company, expressed concern that many global firms may be sacrificing value-creating investments by distributing dividends and buying back their own shares.
Among US nonfinancial corporations, the proportion of investable funds used for dividends and share buybacks has been trending upward, albeit with cyclical ups and downs, since the 1980s.
After a sharp downturn during the 2008-2009 recession, this proportion has now recovered to nearly 50%, a high point relative to historical averages.
The macro evidence indicates that the primary cause of disappointing business investment in the US and other developed countries in the years following the global financial crisis has been anemic demand, not a lack of investable funds resulting from excessive distributions to shareholders.
Over the longer term, however, the upward trend in dividends and share buybacks as a percentage of corporate investable funds is a symptom of mounting shareholder pressure on corporations to focus on short-term returns at the expense of long-term investments.
In a recent McKinsey survey of 1,000 top executives and corporate directors, 63% reported that shareholder pressure to realize short-term returns has increased over the last several years.
Indeed, some 79% reported pressure to demonstrate strong financial returns in two years or less.
Shareholder pressure tends to be greater in older firms, and in the US over the last few decades, the proportion of older firms has been growing as the startup rate for new businesses has fallen.
In addition, as Fink and others have warned, compensation practices that link top executives’ pay to measures of short-term success like quarterly earnings per share or annual equity performance also encourage “short-termism” in corporate investment decisions.
A sliding capital gains tax, with rates that decline as the holding period for investments increases, would reduce incentives for short-termism among investors.
Among others, Larry Fink, the Center for American Progress, and Hillary Clinton propose this approach.
In his recent CEO letter, Fink also calls on companies to issue annual “strategic frameworks” for long-term value creation, supported by quantifiable financial metrics and linking long-term executive compensation to performance on them.
These frameworks, Fink notes, should cover environmental, social, and governance (ESG) factors that are core determinants of long-term value.
Companies can use the new evidence-based standards developed by the Sustainability Accounting Standards Board to disclose material information about their ESG performance to their investors.
Strategic frameworks, along with ESG disclosure, should encourage both companies and their shareholders to focus more on long-term value and less on short-term financial performance.
But at the macro level, expected growth in demand and associated innovation opportunities will remain the primary drivers of business investment.
Inequality and the American Child
NEW YORK – Children, it has long been recognized, are a special group.
They do not choose their parents, let alone the broader conditions into which they are born.
They do not have the same abilities as adults to protect or care for themselves.
That is why the League of Nations approved the Geneva Declaration on the Rights of the Child in 1924, and why the international community adopted the Convention on the Rights of the Child in 1989.
Sadly, the United States is not living up to its obligations.
In fact, it has not even ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
The US, with its cherished image as a land of opportunity, should be an inspiring example of just and enlightened treatment of children.
Instead, it is a beacon of failure – one that contributes to global sluggishness on children’s rights in the international arena.
Though an average American childhood may not be the worst in the world, the disparity between the country’s wealth and the condition of its children is unparalleled.
About 14.5% of the American population as a whole is poor, but 19.9% of children – some 15 million individuals – live in poverty.
Among developed countries, only Romania has a higher rate of child poverty.
The US rate is two-thirds higher than that in the United Kingdom, and up to four times the rate in the Nordic countries.
For some groups, the situation is much worse: more than 38% of black children, and 30% of Hispanic children, are poor.
None of this is because Americans do not care about their children.
It is because America has embraced a policy agenda in recent decades that has caused its economy to become wildly unequal, leaving the most vulnerable segments of society further and further behind.
The growing concentration of wealth – and a significant reduction in taxes on it – has meant less money to spend on investments for the public good, like education and the protection of children.
As a result, America’s children have become worse off.
Their fate is a painful example of how inequality not only undermines economic growth and stability – as economists and organizations like the International Monetary Fund are finally acknowledging – but also violates our most cherished notions of what a fair society should look like.
Income inequality is correlated with inequalities in health, access to education, and exposure to environmental hazards, all of which burden children more than other segments of the population.
Indeed, nearly one in five poor American children are diagnosed with asthma, a rate 60% higher than non-poor children.
Learning disabilities occur almost twice as frequently among children in households earning less than $35,000 a year than they do in households earning more than $100,000.
And some in the US Congress want to cut food stamps – on which some 23 million American households depend, threatening the poorest children with hunger.
These inequalities in outcomes are closely tied to inequalities in opportunities.
Inevitably, in countries where children have inadequate nutrition, insufficient access to health care and education, and higher exposure to environmental hazards, the children of the poor will have far different life prospects from those of the rich.
And, partly because an American child’s lifetime prospects are more dependent on his or her parents’ income and education than in other advanced countries, the US now has the least equality of opportunity of any advanced country.
At America’s most elite universities, for example, only around 9% of students come from the bottom half of the population, while 74% come from the top quarter.
Most societies recognize a moral obligation to help ensure that young people can live up to their potential.
Some countries even impose a constitutional mandate for equality of educational opportunities.
But in America, more is spent on the education of rich students than on the education of the poor.
As a result, the US is wasting some of its most valuable assets, with some young people – bereft of skills – turning to dysfunctional activities.
American states like California spend about as much on prisons as on higher education – and sometimes more.
Without compensatory measures – including pre-school education, ideally beginning at a very young age – unequal opportunities translate into unequal lifelong outcomes by the time children reach the age of five.
That should be a spur to policy action.
Indeed, while inequality’s harmful effects are wide-reaching, and impose huge costs on our economies and societies, they are largely avoidable.
The extremes of inequality observed in some countries are not the inexorable result of economic forces and laws.
The right policies – stronger social safety nets, progressive taxation, and better regulation (especially of the financial sector), to name a few – can reverse these devastating trends.
To generate the political will that such reforms require, we must confront policymakers’ inertia and inaction with the grim facts of inequality and its devastating effects on our children.
We can reduce childhood deprivation and increase equality of opportunity, thereby laying the groundwork for a more just and prosperous future – one that reflects our own avowed values.
So why don’t we?
Of the harm that inequality inflicts on our economies, politics, and societies, the damage done to children demands special concern.
Whatever responsibility poor adults may bear for their lot in life – they may not have worked hard enough, saved enough, or made good decisions – children’s circumstances are thrust upon them without any sort of choice.
Children, perhaps more than anyone, need the protection that rights afford – and the US should be providing the world with a shining example of what that means.
American Conservatism’s Crisis of Ideas
BERKELEY – On the back left corner of my desk right now are three recent books: Arthur Brooks’ The Battle, Charles Murray’s Coming Apart, and Nicholas Eberstadt’s A Nation of Takers.
Together, they constitute an important intellectual movement, which also happens to be a large part of the reason that American conservatism today has little that is constructive to say about managing the economy – and little purchase on the center of the American electorate.
But let’s back up historically, to the founding of what we might call modern conservatism in early nineteenth-century Britain and France.
There were some – Frédéric Bastiat and Jean-Baptiste Say come to mind – who believed that government should put the unemployed to work building infrastructure when markets or production were temporarily disrupted.
But they were balanced by those like Nassau Senior, who spoke out against even famine relief: Although a million people would die in the Irish Potato Famine, “that would scarcely be enough.”
The main thrust of early conservatism was root-and-branch opposition to every form of social insurance: make the poor richer, and they would become more fertile.
As a result, farm sizes would drop (as land was divided among ever more children), labor productivity would fall, and the poor would become even poorer.
Social insurance was not just pointless; it was counterproductive.
The proper economic policy was to teach people to venerate the throne (so that they would respect property), the paternal hearth (so that they would not marry imprudently young), and the religious altar (so that they would fear pre-marital sex).
Then, perhaps, with women chaste for half or more of their childbearing years, the surplus population would diminish and conditions for the poor would be as good as they could be.
Fast-forward 150 years to post-World War II America, and to the original Chicago School critique of the New Deal version of social insurance – that it created “notches” that perverted economic incentives.
The government, Milton Friedman and others argued, told the poor: make more money and we will take away your free housing, food stamps, and income support.
People are rational, Friedman said, so they will not work for long if they get nothing or next to nothing for it.
The big difference between the Malthusian conservative critics of social insurance in the early nineteenth century and the Chicago critics of the 1970’s is that the Chicago critics had a point: Providing public support to the “worthy” poor, and then removing it when they began to stand on their own feet, poisoned incentives and was unlikely to lead to good outcomes.
And so, from 1970 to 2000, a broad coalition of conservatives (who wanted to see the government stop encouraging immorality), centrists (who wanted government money spent effectively), and leftists (who wanted poverty alleviated) removed the “notches” from the social-insurance system.
Presidents Jimmy Carter, Ronald Reagan, George H. W. Bush, Bill Clinton, and even George W. Bush and their supporters created the current system, in which tax rates and eligibility thresholds are not punitive disincentives to enterprise.
So what is the problem that America’s new generation of conservative critics of social insurance sees?
It is not that raising poor people’s standard of living above bare subsistence produces Malthusian catastrophe, or that taxes and withdrawal of welfare benefits make people work, at the margin, for nothing.
For Eberstadt, the problem is that dependence on government is emasculating, and that too many people are dependent on government.
For Brooks, it is that knowing that public programs make one’s life easier causes one to vote for non-Republican candidates.
For Murray, it is that social insurance means that behaving badly does not lead to catastrophe – and we need bad behavior to lead to catastrophe in order to keep people from behaving badly.
The crucial point is that America’s conservative elites believe Brooks, Eberstadt, and Murray.
To this day, Mitt Romney is convinced that he lost the presidency in 2012 because Barack Obama unfairly gave Latino-Americans subsidized health insurance; gave women free reproductive health coverage (excluding abortion); and gave other groups similar “gifts.”
He could “never convince them that they should take personal responsibility and care for their lives.”
In fact, it would be a tough sell for any candidate to convince Americans who receive government benefits that they are dependent rather than empowered; that it is bad for people to vote for politicians who make their lives better; and that good public policy seeks to create human catastrophe rather than to avert it.
The problem for American conservatives is not their choice of candidates or the tone of their rhetoric. It is that their ideas are not politically sustainable.
An Unhinged Democracy in America
NEW YORK – Alexis de Tocqueville, a liberal French aristocrat, visited the United States in 1831 ostensibly to write a study of its “enlightened” prison system (locking people up in solitary confinement like penitent monks was the latest modern idea).
Out of this trip came de Tocqueville’s masterpiece, Democracy in America, in which he expressed admiration for American civil liberties and compared the world’s first genuine liberal democracy favorably with Old World institutions.
But de Tocqueville had serious reservations, too.
The biggest danger to US democracy, he believed, was the tyranny of the majority, the suffocating intellectual conformity of American life, the stifling of minority opinion and dissent.
He was convinced that any exercise of unlimited power, be it by an individual despot or a political majority, is bound to end in disaster.
Democracy, in the sense of majority rule, needs restraints, just like any other system of government.
That is why the British have mixed the authority of elected politicians with that of aristocratic privilege.
And it is why Americans still cherish their Constitution’s separation of governmental powers.
By contrast, in the French republican system, the state represents the so-called will of the people.
As a result, its authority is less constrained, which may explain the greater frequency in France of street demonstrations and even of mob violence.
Indeed, these upheavals may act as informal checks on official power.
De Tocqueville identified another source of restraint in the US system: the power of religion.
Human greed, as well as the temptation of going to extremes, was tempered by the moderating influence of a shared Christian faith.
Liberty, in the US, was inextricably entwined with religious belief.
The spectacle of American politics today would seem to cast doubt on de Tocqueville’s observation.
Or, rather, the rhetoric of many Republicans aspiring to be President sounds like a perversion of what he saw in 1831.
Religion and liberty are still mentioned in one breath, but often to promote extreme views.
Religious minorities are denounced.
Apocalyptic fears are stoked.
Intolerance is promoted.
All in the name of God.
Of course, the US is not the only country where fringe demagogues are now poisoning mainstream politics.
Religious language is less often heard in Western Europe, but all the more in parts of Eastern Europe, Turkey, and Israel.
And the message of populism is similar everywhere in the democratic world: Liberal elites are to be blamed for all our ills and anxieties, from Europe’s refugee crisis to the inequities of the global economy, from “multiculturalism” to the rise of radical Islam.
Populism is causing considerable alarm, not least because mainstream politicians seem less and less capable of finding a convincing way to stop its rise.
Those who are rightly worried about the politics of fear like to assume that populism is a threat to democracy itself.
Distrust of the elites fosters distrust of the system, and the longing for great leaders who will deliver us from the selfishness of professional politicians will lead to new forms of tyranny.
That may turn out to be true.
But, in fact, it is not really democracy that is presently under siege.
In some ways, many societies are more democratic than they were before.
If nothing else, the Donald Trump phenomenon shows that old party establishments can be skirted by popular outsiders.
Social media also make it possible to bypass the traditional filters of authority, such as serious newspapers or broadcasters, and publish any point of view directly.
The power of private fortunes to sway public opinion, especially in the US, also upsets the traditional order.
Anti-elitism can be fanned by vast individual wealth, because elitism is defined less by financial clout than by education.
Angry people swayed by the populist message are angrier at liberal professors, clever bankers, or skeptical journalists than they are at multi-billionaires.
(It is both President Barack Obama’s elite education and the color of his skin – or, rather, the combination of the two – that has attracted so much rage.)
At the same time, people have more power to elect power-hungry crooks than they did before.
Like the wild and woolly views swirling around the Internet, such figures are no longer kept at bay by traditional party elites.
What is steadily falling away is not democracy, but the restraints that de Tocqueville thought were essential to make liberal politics work.
More and more, populist leaders regard their election by the majority of voters as a license to crush all political and cultural dissent.
De Tocqueville’s nightmare is not yet the reality in the US, but it is close to what we see in Russia, Turkey, Hungary, and perhaps Poland.
Even Israel, which, despite its many obvious problems, has always had a robust democracy, is moving in this direction, with government ministers demanding proof of “state loyalty” from writers, artists, and journalists.
It is hard to see how traditional elites are going to regain any authority.
And yet I think de Tocqueville was right.
Without editors, there can be no serious journalism.
Without parties led by experienced politicians, the borders between show business and politics will disappear.
Without limits placed on the appetites and prejudices of the majority, intolerance will rule.
This is not a question of nostalgia or snobbery.
Nor is it a plea to trust anyone with a plausible air of authority.
Anger at the elites is not always unjust.
Globalization, immigration, and cosmopolitanism have served the interests of a highly educated minority, but sometimes at the expense of less privileged people.
And yet, the problem identified by de Tocqueville in the 1830s is more relevant now than ever.
Liberal democracy cannot be reduced to a popularity contest.
Constraints on majority rule are necessary to protect the rights of minorities, be they ethnic, religious, or intellectual.
When that protection disappears, we will all end up losing the freedoms that democracy was supposed to defend.
The Indispensable American Partner
MADRID – The United States is gearing up for that most intoxicating (and exhausting) of political events: an open-seat race for the presidency.
With US President Barack Obama's eight years in office coming to an end, and Vice President Joe Biden unlikely to run, the race will be without an incumbent.
As a result, the election could be less a referendum on the last eight years than a contest of ideas, with foreign policy emerging as a key topic.
The potential candidates have already sought to stake out their positions on key foreign-policy issues, with early Republican frontrunner Jeb Bush, for example, delivering a speech devoted entirely to the topic.
As for the Democrats, former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton's likely nomination (despite recent revelations that she used her personal email account to conduct government business) reinforces foreign policy's centrality to the election.
Recognizing this trend, the World Economic Forum Global Agenda Council has brought together a group of experts and practitioners to help infuse substance into the foreign-policy discussions leading up to the US election, including by preparing a public discussion paper.
From my perspective as the group's only European member, the overarching message should be that the US must conceive of itself not as “the indispensable power," as it now does, but as “the indispensable partner."
This is not merely a matter of semantics; such a change will require the US to re-conceive its role in the world.
But the payoff, for both the US and the liberal world order that it created, would be substantial.
The key to success will be America's ability to retain the best – and abandon the worst – of that most American of notions: exceptionalism.
The sense in the US that the country is unique, with a special mission to promote prosperity, security, and freedom worldwide, has long shaped American foreign policy.
The idea extends as far back as 1630, when John Winthrop, the Massachusetts Bay Colony's first governor, declared that his community must act as a “city upon a hill," setting an example for the world.
In doing so, he planted the seed of the values-based approach that was adopted by the US as it spearheaded the development of the rules and structures that order today's world.
Those rules and structures have delivered unprecedented economic growth, benefiting all (though the US has reaped the greatest rewards).
But, ironically, the notion of American exceptionalism often has led the US to undermine the international system that it nurtured.
Indeed, US history reveals a persistent isolationist streak, in which the “city upon a hill" is not a beacon, but a fortress.
At times, including over the last six years, the belief that the US is better off going it alone has led to withdrawal from the world.
This tendency was not a serious issue before World War II (though the people of Abyssinia and Manchuria may beg to differ).
But today, US withdrawal from the international system that it built has serious ramifications – namely, the kind of chaos and lawlessness exemplified by Russia's invasion of Ukraine.
Yet isolationism is not America's most destructive impulse.
Worse is its “exemptionalism": its penchant for opting out of the rules that it promotes – and often actively enforces – elsewhere.
The lengthy – and growing – list of major international conventions left unratified by the US includes the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, the Mine Ban Convention, the Convention on the Rights of the Child, and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
Beyond the resentment that such an attitude engenders, American exemptionalism directly undermines multilateral institutions' capacity to address challenges that the US is unwilling or unable to resolve on its own.
How can the US expect China to follow rules on maritime delimitation in the East and South China Seas when it refuses to ratify the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea?
US President Barack Obama's administration has tried to create the illusion of a change of course in this regard, pushing “soft" deals that allow the US to participate without submitting to binding rules.
Such was the case with the much-lauded “handshake agreement" between Obama and Chinese President Xi Jinping on carbon-dioxide emissions in November.
But, though such arrangements make for great headlines, they do not provide the stability and predictability necessary for long-term success.
For that, hard rules and strong institutions are essential.
If the US is to serve as the world's “indispensable partner," it must recommit to the rules-based order that has served it – and the world – so well for the last seven decades.
It should begin by strengthening the flagging institutions that have served as the backbone of the liberal international order.
Specifically, the US should finally approve the International Monetary Fund reform package that was agreed in 2010; promote real progress at the Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conference in May; and ensure that this December's UN Framework Convention on Climate Change Conference in Paris yields formal commitments.
Indispensable partnership is about helping countries help themselves.
It requires vision, commitment, and, most important, leadership.
A frank discussion about America's foreign policy could prove vital to ensuring that this “city upon a hill" remains a beacon of hope – and a catalyst of progress.
American Foreign Policy after Iraq
What comes after Iraq?
If President George W. Bush’s current troop “surge” fails to produce an outcome that can be called “victory,” what lessons will the United States draw for its future foreign policy?
Will it turn inward, as it did after its defeat in Vietnam three decades ago?
Will it turn from promoting democracy to a narrow realist view of its interests?
Even while discussion in Washington is fixated on Iraq, a number of thoughtful foreign observers are asking these longer-term questions.
Analysts and pundits have often been mistaken about America’s position in the world.
For example, two decades ago, the conventional wisdom was that the US was in decline.
A decade later, with the Cold War’s end, the new conventional wisdom was that the world was a unipolar American hegemony.
Some neo-conservative pundits drew the conclusion that the US was so powerful that it could decide what it thought was right, and others would have to follow.
Charles Krauthammer celebrated this view as “the new unilateralism,” and it heavily influenced the Bush administration even before the attacks on September 11, 2001.
But the new unilateralism was based on a profound misunderstanding of the nature of power in world politics.
Power is the ability to get the outcomes one wants.
Whether the possession of resources will produce such outcomes depends upon the context.
For example, a large, modern tank army is a powerful resource if a war is fought in a desert, but not if it is fought in a swamp – as America discovered in Vietnam.
In the past, it was assumed that military power dominated most issues, but in today’s world, the contexts of power differ greatly.
I have likened the distribution of power in politics today as analogous to a three-dimensional chess game.
On the top board – military relations among states – the world is, indeed, unipolar, and likely to remain that way for decades.
But on the middle board of economic relations, the world is already multipolar, and the US cannot obtain the outcomes it wants without the cooperation of Europe, Japan, China, and others.
And, on the bottom board of transnational issues outside the control of governments – including everything from climate change to pandemics to transnational terrorism – power is chaotically distributed, and it makes no sense at all to claim American hegemony.
Yet it is on this bottom board that we find most of the greatest challenges we face today.
The only way to grapple with these problems is through cooperation with others, and that requires the “soft” power of attraction as well as the hard power of coercion. There is no simple military solution that will produce the outcomes we want.
The new unilateralists who dominated Bush’s first administration made the mistake of thinking that the unipolar distribution of power in the military context was sufficient to guide foreign policy.
They were like a young boy with a hammer who thinks that every problem resembles a nail.
The danger of their approach is now obvious.
Whoever plays a three-dimensional game by focusing on only one board is bound to lose in the long run.
Fortunately, the pendulum has begun to swing back toward cooperation.
In Bush’s second term, some of the most extreme unilateralists have departed from the government, and the president has approached difficult problems like North Korea or Iran with a more multilateral approach than during his first term.
Likewise, for all the complaints about the United Nations, the US and others turned to UN peacekeepers to sort out the mess after the Lebanon War last summer.
The Iraq War, in particular, increased public awareness of the mistakes in Bush’s first term, but other issues are changing as well.
Americans now view cooperative action on global climate change more favorably.
Similarly, the threat of pandemics means that Americans may come to recognize the importance of a stronger World Health Organization, just as the problem of nuclear proliferation is increasing awareness of the importance of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
The nature of these problems means that the US does not have the luxury of turning inward no matter what the outcome in Iraq.
These are not problems you can leave overseas.
They follow you home.
It also is unlikely that American foreign policy will return to a narrow realism and drop all emphasis on democracy and human rights.
While the Iraq War discredited the idea of coercive democratization, both Republicans and Democrats have a strong strand of idealism in their foreign policy orientations.
The problem for whoever is elected president in 2008 will be to find appropriate realistic means to advance democratic values and adjust official rhetoric accordingly.
When rhetoric greatly outstrips reality, others view it as hypocrisy.
Americans will need to find ways to assert their narrative of democracy, freedom, and rights in a manner that respects diversity and the views of others.
What Iraq has taught is the importance of developing civil society and the rule of law before trying to hold broad-based elections.
Democracy is more than voting, for it requires large investments in education, institutions, and promotion of non-governmental organizations.
It must be rooted in the indigenous society and bear its characteristics, not be imposed from abroad.
It is highly unlikely that the US will react after Iraq as it did after Vietnam.
The paradox of American power is that the world’s only military superpower cannot protect its citizens by acting alone.
American Foreign Policy After the Mid-Term Elections
NEW YORK – Few Americans cast their ballot in the recent mid-term elections on the basis of foreign policy.
While it may be difficult for people around the world to comprehend this, given the global reach of the United States, it is an undeniable fact.
Most Americans are, after all, preoccupied with the US economy’s sluggish growth and persistent high unemployment.
The world’s challenges seem far removed from their day-to-day lives.
The Cold War ended a generation ago; the terror attacks of September 11, 2001, are nearly a decade in the past.
Most Americans do not feel the sacrifices associated with the large troop presence and ongoing conflicts in Afghanistan and Iraq.
But the fact that foreign policy did not materially affect the November elections does not mean that the results will not affect US foreign policy.
They will, but in ways that are inconsistent and even surprising.
One relationship sure to be influenced by Republican gains will be that between the US and Russia.
Quick or easy Senate approval of the New START arms-control treaty is highly unlikely, given stated concerns about verification and the protection of US missile-defense programs; instead, we can expect delays and, possibly, attempts to amend what the two governments already agreed upon.
Congress may also prove less willing to remove hurdles to Russia’s admission to the World Trade Organization, given what is widely judged to be its leaders’ anti-democratic behavior.
China, too, will feel the results of the new balance in Congress.
Pressure was already growing to introduce trade sanctions in response to China’s refusal to allow its currency to rise to a natural level against the dollar.
Such pressure will likely grow, given concerns over Chinese behavior both at home and abroad.
Moreover, Congress will resist rolling back any of the long-standing economic sanctions against Cuba.
President Barack Obama has the authority to take some small steps on his own to normalize ties, but substantial change to US policy requires Congress to act – and Congress wants to see fundamental change in Cuba before it does so.
There will be other consequences stemming from the election.
What little chance there was of the US backing any global plan to limit or tax carbon emissions has disappeared.
Improvement in US performance on climate change will have to come from innovation and increased energy efficiency.
One can anticipate the Republicans, now in control of the House of Representatives, exploiting their ability to convene hearings to question and review foreign policy.
Depending on how this power is used (or abused), it can be beneficial (exercising needed oversight and increasing the transparency of policy and policy-making) or destructive (if, for example, hearings degenerate into politically motivated attacks on administration officials and policies).
In many other areas, continuity can be expected to trump change.
This comes as little surprise, as America’s Constitution and political system delegate most of the initiative on foreign policy and defense to the president.
Yes, Congress must declare war, approve spending, agree to most senior appointments, and (in the case of the Senate) ratify treaties, but the president has enormous latitude when it comes to carrying out diplomacy and using military force in situations other than war, which tend to be most situations.
One area of probable continuity is the Middle East, where Obama will continue to try to broker a deal between Israelis and Palestinians and press Iran not to develop nuclear weapons.
(Republicans, however will argue for putting less pressure on Israel to compromise and more pressure on Iran.)  But he can expect considerable backing from Republicans if he wants to maintain a sizeable US military presence in Afghanistan beyond this July, or a modest military presence in Iraq beyond the end of 2011.
Questions abound when it comes to foreign economic policy, however.
Three completed trade agreements (with South Korea, Panama, and Colombia) have been languishing for years, mostly because of deep opposition to free trade from labor unions and the Democratic Party.
Republicans have historically been more supportive of such bilateral free-trade agreements.
But will the new generation of Republicans continue this tradition?
There is a fair chance that one or more of these bilateral accords will be approved (in part because the Obama administration seems finally to have recognized that trade can generate good jobs), but it is far less certain that the president will gain the authority needed to negotiate a new global trade deal.
An even bigger question mark hovers over what might be the greatest national security concern of all: the federal budget deficit.
Failure to address the deficit (and the mounting debt) will create pressures to reduce what the US spends on foreign aid, intelligence, and defense – although Republicans are more likely than Democrats to protect such spending (except for foreign aid).
Mounting debt also leaves the US vulnerable to the decisions of those who lend it money – or to the vagaries of the market.
A dollar crisis could weaken the foundations of American power.
But averting such a crisis requires that the White House and Congress, Democrats and Republicans, agree on a plan for moving the US budget toward balance.
The post-Cold War era was not really an “era,” but rather a gradual transition from a bilateral Cold War to a more complex international order that still involves, in the final analysis, two world powers.
In brief, the decisive axis of the new order increasingly involves the United States and the People’s Republic of China.
The Sino-American competition involves two significant realities that distinguish it from the Cold War: neither party is excessively ideological in its orientation; and both parties recognize that they really need mutual accommodation.
America’s supposed “pivot to Asia” took a back seat in 2014 to the crises in Ukraine and the Middle East.
To what extent has uncertainty about the US commitment in Asia stoked tension between China and America’s Asian allies?
I disagree with the premises of the question.
I do think America has made it quite clear that it is in the interest both of America and China to avoid situations in which they will be pushed toward a collision.
The recent indications of some initial dialogue between China and India, and between China and Japan, suggest that China also realizes that escalating old grievances is not in its interest.
The more serious problem with the “pivot to Asia” was its actual wording, which implied a military posture designed to “contain” or “isolate” China.
The Chinese have come to realize more clearly that we were not deliberately attempting to isolate them, but that we had a stake in the avoidance of collisions in the Far East that could produce a wider spillover.
Xi Jinping has used his war on corruption to concentrate more power in his hands than any Chinese leader since Deng Xiaoping, 30 years ago.
How do you see Xi’s presidency evolving?
Power in China is somewhat informally defined, and its limits are set more by political realities than by constitutional arrangements.
That makes it difficult to say whether Xi’s power is greater than any Chinese leader’s since Deng.
He certainly has an authoritative personality and without doubt is more active on the international scene than some of his predecessors.
He has also been very decisive in attacking the growing corruption that has become a major source of internal malaise, reaching even the highest levels of government.
In that respect, it may be argued that his power is more wide-ranging than that of his predecessors, but in fairness it must also be noted that the patterns of corruption that his predecessors faced were not as acute and widespread as they have become in recent years.
At the same time, the increasing emphasis in party journals on the proposition that China’s armed forces must be viewed as servants of the Communist Party, and not simply of the nation, seems to suggest concern that the military may be developing its own view of Chinese domestic affairs, in addition to proclaiming with increasing assertiveness its responsibility for national security.
The Party elite, quite understandably, does not find this reassuring.
Can Russian President Vladimir Putin’s regime withstand a prolonged period of low energy prices and Western sanctions?
What risks do you see emerging should Russia’s economy continue to decline, with Putin increasingly unable to reward his political base?
There is, of course, a danger that at some point Putin may choose to lash out and create a truly massive international crisis, and perhaps precipitate some new form of direct East-West warfare.
But to say that, one must also assume that to some extent he himself is unbalanced and has shifted from a kind of guerilla warfare against the West, always with some possibility of retreat, to all-out combat.
The outcome of that would be inherently unpredictable, but probably in any case very destructive for Russian wellbeing.
If Russia’s economy continues to decline, and if the West succeeds in deterring Putin from further use of force, it is still conceivable that some acceptable resolution (a form of which I recommended publicly by talking about the Finland model) may be contrived.
But that depends in turn on the West’s firmness in supporting Ukraine’s efforts to stabilize itself.
Following the withdrawal of US troops from Afghanistan and Iraq, much of the world now perceives the US as being in a period of “retreat,” similar to the post-Vietnam War era.
Is the US embracing a form of neo-isolationism?
Or will America’s apparent inward turn be as brief as it was following Vietnam?
I do not believe that the US is in a “period of retreat.”
The fact of the matter is that the redistribution of global power has produced a situation in which the US is no longer the sole hegemon.
The US has to acknowledge the fact that the world is now much more complex.
The spread of conflict throughout the Middle East is currently precipitated more by the rise of religious sectarianism than by American interventionism.
In these volatile circumstances, greater attention must be given to the national interests of countries such as Turkey, Iran, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and Israel.
By the same token, the interests of any one of them must not be allowed to become the total interest of the US.
What may surprise the world most in 2015?
Perhaps the gradual reappearance in Russia of a more politically assertive liberal middle class.
That middle class was beginning to play a more significant role in shaping domestic and international Russian policy under Dmitri Medvedev.
With Putin’s return to power and his recent adventurism, it has been pushed aside by deliberately awakened and intensely stimulated national chauvinism.
Waving a chauvinist banner, however, may not be the best solution for dealing with international problems, especially if the West is intelligent and united. The Russian middle class, quite naturally, wishes to live in a society like that of Western Europe.
A Russia that gradually begins to gravitate toward the West will also be a Russia that ceases to disrupt the international system.
America’s Enemy Within
NEW YORK – Barring any unexpected new revelations, there is not much to be learned from the Tsarnaev brothers, better known as “the Boston bombers.”
We can dig into their family histories in strife-torn Dagestan, or examine, once again, the lethal appeal of Islamist radicalism.
But I doubt that this would be enlightening.
The elder brother, Tamerlan, who died in a gun battle with the police, appears to fit perfectly the profile of what the German writer Hans Magnus Enzensberger calls “the radical loser.”
And his younger brother, Dzhokhar, recovering from gunshot wounds in a Boston hospital while waiting to be put on trial for his life, seems to have been a pathetic follower who acted less out of deep conviction than out of fraternal love.
The radical loser is the kind of young man who feels victimized by an unfeeling, uncaring world.
That sour sense of rejection, felt by many confused youths, turns for some into a fierce desire for vengeance.
Like Samson in the temple of Gaza, he wishes to destroy himself in a public act of violence, taking as many people as possible with him.
Anything can trigger this final act: a lover’s rejection, a job application denied.
In the case of Tamerlan, a talented boxer, he was denied the chance to become a champion because he was not yet a United States citizen.
Radical Islamism offered him a ready-made cause to die for.
More interesting, and in a way far more disturbing, has been the reaction in the US to the Boston bombings, which killed three people and injured 264.
Even after Tamerlan had died, and Dzhokhar, already wounded, was the only known fugitive, the Boston authorities decided to close down the entire city.
Public transport was halted, trains to and from the city were stopped, shops and business closed, and citizens were told to stay home.
Until the surviving bomber was found, Boston was reduced to a ghost town.
If two troubled young men with homemade bombs cobbled together from fertilizer and pressure cookers can have this effect on a major American city, one can imagine how tempting their example must now be to other radical losers, not to mention radical groups.
It shows how vulnerable a modern city can be when its leaders lose their nerve.
The authorities’ overblown reaction – and that of much of the press – was all the odder for having occurred just as the US Senate was voting down a bill that would have made it harder for known killers and mentally disturbed people to buy guns, or for private individuals to acquire weapons normally used only in warfare.
It seems as though Americans can tolerate a society in which schoolchildren and other innocents are regularly murdered by deranged men with weapons bought on the open market, but erupt in collective hysteria when the killings are committed by people labeled as “terrorists.”
This may reflect what people are accustomed to.
The Spanish had grown so inured to acts of violence from Basque separatists that the murder of 191 people in Madrid by Islamist extremists in 2004 was met with remarkable sang-froid.
When 52 people were killed in a suicide bombing on the London Underground the following year, the British, too, reacted with relative calm, having lived through years of Irish terrorist violence in the 1970’s.
Like the Spanish, they were used to it.
Americans, despite the attacks of September 11, 2001, are not.
Worse than that, a number of Republican senators, including such luminaries as John McCain, called for stripping Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, who is a US citizen, of his legal rights and placing him before a military tribunal as an “enemy combatant,” as though the 19-year-old college student were a soldier in a war against America.
Exaggerated fear of outside enemies has always been part of the American political landscape.
The “nation of immigrants” was traditionally regarded as a refuge from danger.
The evil outside world should not be able to touch the Land of the Free.
When it does – Pearl Harbor, September 2001 – all hell breaks loose.
Another factor may be the need for a common enemy in a country whose citizens come from so many different cultures and traditions.
Besieged by Communists or Islamists, people feel a sense of belonging.
Defense of the nation against dangerous outsiders – and their domestic agents, whether real or imagined – provides a powerful bond.
Such bonds can be useful, even necessary, in times of war.
But the politics of fear poses a danger to the US itself.
The aim of political terrorist groups, such as Al Qaeda, is to provoke retaliation and maximize publicity for their cause.
As common criminals, such groups’ members would not achieve this goal.
But by claiming to be soldiers at war with the world’s biggest military power, they gain sympathy, as well as recruits, among the radical losers and the disaffected.
Former President George W. Bush once explained terrorism as the expression of hatred for American freedom.
But when terrorism results in torture of prisoners, ever more police surveillance, and official threats to US citizens’ legal rights – or, for that matter, when a crime committed by two young immigrants causes an entire city to be shut down – Americans’ government is harming their freedom more than any terrorist could ever hope to do.
American Hegemony or American Primacy?
CAMBRIDGE – No country in modern history has possessed as much global military power as the United States.
Yet some analysts now argue that the US is following in the footsteps of the United Kingdom, the last global hegemon to decline.
This historical analogy, though increasingly popular, is misleading.
Britain was never as dominant as the US is today.
To be sure, it maintained a navy equal in size to the next two fleets combined, and its empire, on which the sun never set, ruled over a quarter of humankind.
But there were major differences in the relative power resources of imperial Britain and contemporary America.
By the outbreak of World War I, Britain ranked only fourth among the great powers in terms of military personnel, fourth in terms of GDP, and third in military spending.
The British Empire was ruled in large part through reliance on local troops.
Of the 8.6 million British forces in WWI, nearly a third came from the overseas empire.
That made it increasingly difficult for the government in London to declare war on behalf of the empire when nationalist sentiments began to intensify.
By World War II, protecting the empire had become more of a burden than an asset.
The fact that the UK was situated so close to powers like Germany and Russia made matters even more challenging.
For all the loose talk of an “American empire,” the fact is that the US does not have colonies that it must administer, and thus has more freedom to maneuver than the UK did.
And, surrounded by unthreatening countries and two oceans, it finds it far easier to protect itself.
That brings us to another problem with the global hegemon analogy: the confusion over what “hegemony” actually means.
Some observers conflate the concept with imperialism; but the US is clear evidence that a hegemon does not have to have a formal empire.
Others define hegemony as the ability to set the rules of the international system; but precisely how much influence over this process a hegemon must have, relative to other powers, remains unclear.
Still others consider hegemony to be synonymous with control of the most power resources.
But, by this definition, nineteenth-century Britain – which at the height of its power in 1870 ranked third (behind the US and Russia) in GDP and third (behind Russia and France) in military expenditures – could not be considered hegemonic, despite its naval dominance.
Similarly, those who speak of American hegemony after 1945 fail to note that the Soviet Union balanced US military power for more than four decades.
Though the US had disproportionate economic clout, its room for political and military maneuver was constrained by Soviet power.
Some analysts describe the post-1945 period as a US-led hierarchical order with liberal characteristics, in which the US provided public goods while operating within a loose system of multilateral rules and institutions that gave weaker states a say.
They point out that it may be rational for many countries to preserve this institutional framework, even if American power resources decline.
In this sense, the US-led international order could outlive America’s primacy in power resources, though many others argue that the emergence of new powers portends this order’s demise.
But, when it comes to the era of supposed US hegemony, there has always been a lot of fiction mixed in with the facts.
It was less a global order than a group of like-minded countries, largely in the Americas and Western Europe, which comprised less than half of the world.
And its effects on non-members – including significant powers like China, India, Indonesia, and the Soviet bloc – were not always benign.
Given this, the US position in the world could more accurately be called a “half-hegemony.”
Of course, America did maintain economic dominance after 1945: the devastation of WWII in so many countries meant that the US produced nearly half of global GDP.
That position lasted until 1970, when the US share of global GDP fell to its pre-war level of one-quarter.
But, from a political or military standpoint, the world was bipolar, with the Soviet Union balancing America’s power.
Indeed, during this period, the US often could not defend its interests: the Soviet Union acquired nuclear weapons; communist takeovers occurred in China, Cuba, and half of Vietnam; the Korean War ended in a stalemate; and revolts in Hungary and Czechoslovakia were repressed.
Against this background, “primacy” seems like a more accurate description of a country’s disproportionate (and measurable) share of all three kinds of power resources: military, economic, and soft.
The question now is whether the era of US primacy is coming to an end.
Given the unpredictability of global developments, it is, of course, impossible to answer this question definitively.
The rise of transnational forces and non-state actors, not to mention emerging powers like China, suggests that there are big changes on the horizon.
But there is still reason to believe that, at least in the first half of this century, the US will retain its primacy in power resources and continue to play the central role in the global balance of power.
In short, while the era of US primacy is not over, it is set to change in important ways.
Whether or not these changes will bolster global security and prosperity remains to be seen.
Renewing American Leadership
MADRID – December always provides an opportunity to pause and reflect on what was and what will be.
This year, one of the conclusions that such reflection yields is that the United States remains firmly at the center of the liberal world order.
Another is that the US needs to do more to lead in the way that its international standing demands.
Doubts about America’s continued global leadership have been proliferating for years.
But, though the much-discussed multi-polar world order may well be in the cards, the reality is that, for now, efforts to address global challenges – from climate change to conflict in the Middle East – demand US engagement.
Unfortunately, the narrative of American decline has gained so much traction in recent years that even US officials seem to have started to believe it, pursuing weak and piecemeal policies (or, in some cases, doing nothing at all).
President Barack Obama’s restrained foreign-policy approach appears to be fueling, not reducing, global instability.
The reasons for this lack of strong action are disputed.
Some blame Obama’s own fears about repeating his predecessors’ mistakes; others blame a hostile Congress for tying his hands.
In fact, both factors may be at work.
It may well be true that Obama would rather exercise caution – even when bold action is called for – than act impulsively and potentially cause more damage.
But the negative impact of an obstructionist, highly partisan US Congress should not be underestimated.
For example, by blocking reforms to International Monetary Fund governance that were agreed in 2010, Congress has damaged, perhaps irreparably, the legitimacy and relevance of the Bretton Woods institutions.
Likewise, by refusing to ratify the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, the US Congress has undermined America’s credibility as it attempts to reaffirm international law in the South China Sea, where China is acting with increasing audacity.
And, by opposing the inclusion of legally binding climate commitments, it weakened the global climate agreement that was reached this month in Paris, leaving compliance and implementation uncertain.
Stalemate has become the name of the game in US politics in recent years.
That is why next year’s presidential election is so crucial.
It offers an opportunity for a fresh start, a new approach that produces the type of policy actions that the world needs.
The key is engagement – among branches of the US government, between the US government and the public, and between the US and the rest of the world.
For starters, to avoid the kind of obstructionism that prevailed in the last eight years, the next president must engage Congress directly and actively.
And, in fact, two of the Obama administration’s recent wins – the passage of so-called trade promotion authority (fast-track negotiating authority to conclude the Trans-Pacific Partnership) and the reauthorization of the small but vital Export-Import Bank – were the result of dedicated outreach, education, and, yes, cajoling of lawmakers.
The Iran nuclear agreement, one of Obama’s hallmark achievements, involved similar efforts to engage Congress, from protracted trips to Capitol Hill by Obama administration officials to a creative approach that allowed legislators to display their displeasure for the deal, without blocking its progress.
Even in America’s highly divisive political atmosphere, it seems, where there is a will, there is a way.
America’s next president must also improve engagement with citizens, whose widespread disaffection constrains – or allows – US leaders to pursue a weak foreign policy.
Like many Europeans today, most Americans do not seem to understand – or care to understand – that the crumbling of the liberal world order would have dire consequences for all of them.
It was not always this way.
Immediately after World War II, the memory of war, together with the enduring threat posed by the Soviet Union, made plain the importance of building and maintaining a liberal world order.
Today, though the need for such an order is just as great, the argument is not nearly as comprehensible or emotionally powerful.
Discussion of rules and institutions comes across as bloodless.
It is up to political leaders – and especially the president – to figure out how to make a compelling case about what is at stake.
Only this approach can secure the mandate from the public that the next US president will need to engage effectively with other world leaders.
And make no mistake: Such engagement is indispensable.
While the US must play an integral role in addressing global challenges, from ending the Syrian civil war to following through on the promises of the Paris climate agreement, it cannot do it alone.
Real progress will demand real cooperation.
In the second half of the twentieth century, the US showed that committed leadership could help to ensure widespread stability and prosperity.
In the twenty-first century, it has showed how devastating a lack of such leadership can be.
Finger pointing will not fix anything.
Only by pursuing genuine, deep, and sustained engagement, both at home and abroad, can the next administration ensure that the coming years will be better than the last.
American Pie in the Sky
NEW YORK – While the risk of a disorderly crisis in the eurozone is well recognized, a more sanguine view of the United States has prevailed.
For the last three years, the consensus has been that the US economy was on the verge of a robust and self-sustaining recovery that would restore above-potential growth.
That turned out to be wrong, as a painful process of balance-sheet deleveraging – reflecting excessive private-sector debt, and then its carryover to the public sector – implies that the recovery will remain, at best, below-trend for many years to come.
Even this year, the consensus got it wrong, expecting a recovery to above-trend &nbsp;annual GDP growth – faster than 3%.
But the first-half growth rate looks set to come in closer to 1.5% at best, even below 2011’s dismal 1.7%.
And now, after getting the first half of 2012 wrong, many are repeating the fairy tale that a combination of lower oil prices, rising auto sales, recovering house prices, and a resurgence of US manufacturing will boost growth in the second half of the year and fuel above-potential growth by 2013.
The reality is the opposite: for several reasons, growth will slow further in the second half of 2012 and be even lower in 2013 – close to stall speed.
First, growth in the second quarter has decelerated from a mediocre 1.8% in January-March, as job creation – averaging 70,000 a month – fell sharply.
Second, expectations of the “fiscal cliff” – automatic tax increases and spending cuts set for the end of this year – will keep spending and growth lower through the second half of 2012.
So will uncertainty about who will be President in 2013; about tax rates and spending levels; about the threat of another government shutdown over the debt ceiling; and about the risk of another sovereign rating downgrade should political gridlock continue to block a plan for medium-term fiscal consolidation.
In such conditions, most firms and consumers will be cautious about spending – an option value of waiting – thus further weakening the economy.
Third, the fiscal cliff would amount to a 4.5%-of-GDP drag on growth in 2013 if all tax cuts and transfer payments were allowed to expire and draconian spending cuts were triggered.
Of course, the drag will be much smaller, as tax increases and spending cuts will be much milder.
But, even if the fiscal cliff turns out to be a mild growth bump – a mere 0.5% of GDP – and annual growth at the end of the year is just 1.5%, as seems likely, the fiscal drag will suffice to slow the economy to stall speed: a growth rate of barely 1%.
Fourth, private consumption growth in the last few quarters does not reflect growth in real wages (which are actually falling).
Rather, growth in disposable income (and thus in consumption) has been sustained since last year by another $1.4 trillion in tax cuts and extended transfer payments, implying another $1.4 trillion of public debt.
Unlike the eurozone and the United Kingdom, where a double-dip recession is already under way, owing to front-loaded fiscal austerity, the US has prevented some household deleveraging through even more public-sector releveraging –&nbsp;that is, by stealing some growth from the future.
In 2013, as transfer payments are phased out, however gradually, and as some tax cuts are allowed to expire, disposable income growth and consumption growth will slow.
The US will then face not only the direct effects of a fiscal drag, but also its indirect effect on private spending.
Fifth, four external forces will further impede US growth: a worsening eurozone crisis; an increasingly hard landing for China; a generalized slowdown of emerging-market economies, owing to cyclical factors (weak advanced-country growth) and structural causes (a state-capitalist model that reduces potential growth); and the risk of higher oil prices in 2013 as negotiations and sanctions fail to convince Iran to abandon its nuclear program.
Policy responses will have very limited effect in stemming the US economy’s deceleration toward stall speed: even with only a mild fiscal drag on growth, the US dollar is likely to strengthen as the eurozone crisis weakens the euro and as global risk aversion returns.
The US Federal Reserve will carry out more quantitative easing this year, but it will be ineffective: long-term interest rates are already very low, and lowering them further would not boost spending.
Indeed, the credit channel is frozen and velocity has collapsed, with banks hoarding increases in base money in the form of excess reserves.
Moreover, the dollar is unlikely to weaken as other countries also carry out quantitative easing.
Similarly, the gravity of weaker growth will most likely overcome the levitational effect on equity prices from more quantitative easing, particularly given that equity valuations today are not as depressed as they were in 2009 or 2010.
Indeed, growth in earnings and profits is now running out of steam, as the effect of weak demand on top-line revenues takes a toll on bottom-line margins and profitability.
A significant equity-price correction could, in fact, be the force that in 2013 tips the US economy into outright contraction.
And if the US (still the world’s largest economy) starts to sneeze again, the rest of the world – its immunity already weakened by Europe’s malaise and emerging countries’ slowdown – will catch pneumonia.
American Power in the Twenty-First Century
CAMBRIDGE – The United States government’s National Intelligence Council projects that American dominance will be “much diminished” by 2025, and that the one key area of continued American superiority – military power – will be less significant in the increasingly competitive world of the future.
Russian President Dmitri Medvedev has called the 2008 financial crisis a sign that America’s global leadership is coming to an end.
The leader of Canada’s opposition Liberal Party, Michael Ignatieff, suggests that US power has passed its mid-day.
How can we know if these predictions are correct?
One should beware of misleading metaphors of organic decline.
Countries are not like humans with predictable life spans.
For example, after Britain lost its American colonies at the end of the eighteenth century, Horace Walpole lamented Britain’s reduction to “as insignificant a country as Denmark or Sardinia.”
He failed to foresee that the industrial revolution would give Britain a second century of even greater ascendency.
Rome remained dominant for more than three centuries after the apogee of Roman power.
Even then, Rome did not succumb to another state, but suffered a death of a thousand cuts inflicted by various barbarian tribes.
Indeed, for all the fashionable predictions of China, India, or Brazil surpassing the US in the coming decades, the classical transition of power among great states may be less of a problem than the rise of modern barbarians – non-state actors.
In an information-based world of cyber-insecurity, power diffusion may be a greater threat than power transition.
So, what will it mean to wield power in the global information age of the twenty-first century?
What resources will produce power?
In the sixteenth century, control of colonies and gold bullion gave Spain the edge; seventeenth-century Holland profited from trade and finance; eighteenth-century France gained from its larger population and armies; and nineteenth-century British power rested on its industrial primacy and its navy.
Conventional wisdom has always held that the state with the largest military prevails, but in an information age it may be the state (or non-state) with the best story that wins.
Today, it is far from clear how the balance of power is measured, much less how to develop successful survival strategies.
In his inaugural address in 2009, President Barack Obama stated that “our power grows through its prudent use; our security emanates from the justness of our cause, the force of our example, the tempering qualities of humility and restraint.”
Shortly thereafter, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said, “America cannot solve the most pressing problems on our own, and the world cannot solve them without America.
We must use what has been called ‘smart power,’ the full range of tools at our disposal.”
Smart power means the combination of the hard power of command and the soft power of attraction.
Power always depends on context.
The child who dominates on the playground may become a laggard when the context changes to a disciplined classroom.
In the middle of the twentieth century, Josef Stalin scornfully asked how many divisions the Pope had, but four decades later, the Papacy was still intact while Stalin’s empire had collapsed.
In today’s world, the distribution of power varies with the context.
It is distributed in a pattern that resembles a three-dimensional chess game.
On the top chessboard, military power is largely unipolar, and the US is likely to remain the only superpower for some time.
But on the middle chessboard, economic power has already been multi-polar for more than a decade, with the US, Europe, Japan, and China as the major players, and others gaining in importance.
The bottom chessboard is the realm of cross-border transactions that occur outside of government control.
It includes diverse non-state actors, such as bankers electronically transferring sums larger than most national budgets, and, at the other extreme, terrorists transferring weapons or hackers threatening cyber-security.
It also includes new challenges like pandemics and climate change.
On this bottom board, power is widely dispersed, and it makes no sense to speak of unipolarity, multipolarity, hegemony, or any other cliché.
Even in the aftermath of the financial crisis, the giddy pace of technological change is likely to continue to drive globalization and transnational challenges.
The problem for American power in the twenty-first century is that there are more and more things outside the control of even the most powerful state.
Although the US does well on military measures, there is much going on that those measures fail to capture.
Under the influence of the information revolution and globalization, world politics is changing in a way that prevents America from achieving all its international goals acting alone.
For example, international financial stability is vital to Americans’ prosperity, but the US needs the cooperation of others to ensure it.
Global climate change, too, will affect Americans’ quality of life, but the US cannot manage the problem alone.
In a world where borders are more porous than ever to everything from drugs to infectious diseases to terrorism, America must help build international coalitions and institutions to address shared threats and challenges.
In this sense, power becomes a positive sum game.
It is not enough to think in terms of power over others. One must also think in terms of power to accomplish goals.
On many transnational issues, empowering others can help to accomplish one’s own goals.
In this world, networks and connectedness become an important source of relevant power.
The problem of American power in the twenty-first century is not one of decline, but of recognizing that even the most powerful country cannot achieve its aims without the help of others.
Abusing Churchill
NEW YORK – A bronze bust of Winston Churchill, displayed in the White House since the 1960s, has been the object of a continuing right-wing canard in Washington.
The story goes that when President Barack Obama moved in, he returned the bust to the British Embassy, supposedly signifying his hatred of Britain.
In fact, Obama did no such thing.
The bust still stands in the White House Residence, where it always did, except for a short time under President George W. Bush when it was being repaired.
But Obama might have done well to remove the bust.
The cult of Churchill has not been an altogether beneficial one for the United States.
Too many US presidents fancy themselves Churchill’s true heirs.
Bush had a copy of Churchill’s bust, lent to him by Tony Blair, in the Oval Office.
He liked to portray himself as a “war president,” a “decider,” and a “great leader,” like Churchill.
He had a taste for battle dress.
And he got his country into a very foolish war.
Donald Trump’s British crony, Nigel Farage, the former leader of the UK Independence Party, suggested that Trump should put the bronze bust back in the Oval Office.
Trump thought this was a splendid idea.
Trump is the least appropriate figure to cast himself in Churchill’s mold.
Insofar as he has a coherent position on anything, he is hostile to most of the things that Churchill stood for.
His “America first” posture, standing aloof from Western allies, is exactly the kind of attitude against which Churchill and Franklin D. Roosevelt struggled in order to successfully resist Hitler’s Third Reich.
The summer before the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, 75 years ago this month, Churchill and Roosevelt met in Placentia Bay, Newfoundland, to set out their ideals for a postwar world.
The resulting Atlantic Charter included everything Trump seems to be against: lower trade barriers, economic cooperation, and the advancement of social welfare.
Once Hitler was defeated, Churchill was also a proponent of European unification, even if he remained ambivalent about Britain’s role in the future union.
Farage’s campaign for Brexit, often pilfering Churchill’s own wartime rhetoric about Britain’s finest hour in defending freedom against tyranny, was aimed at dismantling the very project Churchill favored.
The “special relationship” between the US and Britain, established during WWII, was never as substantial as Churchill and others liked to believe.
The US, as the dominant postwar power, pursued its own interests, whether the British liked it or not.
And British pride in standing alone against Nazi Germany, and the self-aggrandizing notion of being America’s special partner, has prevented the United Kingdom from playing to its full strength as a major power inside the EU.
American leaders sometimes pay lip service to the special relationship, to flatter visiting British prime ministers or get the UK onside in dubious military adventures.
There is talk of giving the relationship a new lease of life in the age of Trump and Brexit.
Whereas Obama warned that Britain outside the EU would be at the back of the queue for special trade deals, House Speaker Paul D. Ryan recently stated that the US should quickly make a new deal with Britain to show “solidarity” with an “indispensable ally.”
A special US tenderness for Brexit Britain – Trump oddly referred to himself as “Mr. Brexit” – rather suggests the solidarity of two countries embarking on their own forms of economic nationalism.
Again, this is precisely the route that Churchill and Roosevelt sought to avoid; after all, economic nationalism was one of the reasons why Europeans almost succeeded in destroying their continent.
Of course, Trump’s love of Brexit may be just a question of words, like so much else about the great showman.
It is hard to imagine the US jeopardizing its economic interests by favoring Britain at the expense of far bigger stakes in the rest of Europe.
But words do matter, as Churchill knew well.
Again, the rhetoric of Trump and his supporters, and of the Brexiteers, could not be further removed from the spirit of the Atlantic Charter.
Talk of sinister international bankers and other “citizens of nowhere” (British Prime Minister Theresa May’s phrase) undermining, in league with rootless liberal elites, “ordinary,” “real,” and “decent” people (Farage) smacks of the anti-Semitic propaganda that swirled around Europe in the 1930s.
And Churchill’s response to the flirtations of Trump and the European far right with Vladimir Putin’s Russia can easily be imagined.
None of this means that Churchill was always right, let alone a figure to emulate.
He was the right man in 1940 to raise British morale, when morale was about the only thing the British had going for them.
But he is not a good model for politicians in less perilous times.
His views of colonial rule were already out of date before the war, and became a racist anachronism after it.
His romantic ideas about the moral superiority of the English-speaking peoples were old-fashioned during his lifetime, and are an arrogant absurdity now.
But Churchill was neither petty nor provincial.
His vision, at least as far as the Western world is concerned, may have been romantic, but it had a certain nobility.
The same cannot be said of the next occupant of the White House.
The idea of Trump, advised by Farage, using Churchill’s bronze head as a totem would have filled the old man with horror.
American Retreats
Los Angeles – As Barack Obama’s incoming administration debates the pace and consequences of withdrawal from Iraq, it would do well to examine the strategic impact of other American exits in the final decades of the twentieth century.
Although American commitments to Lebanon, Somalia, Vietnam, and Cambodia differed mightily, history reveals that despite immediate costs to America’s reputation, disengagement ultimately redounded to America’s advantage. 
In all of these cases, regional stability of sorts emerged after an American military withdrawal, albeit at the cost of a significant loss of life.
America’s former adversaries either became preoccupied with consolidating or sharing power, suffered domestic defeat, or confronted neighboring states.
Ultimately, America’s vital interests prevailed.
The evidence today suggests that this pattern can be repeated when the United States departs Mesopotamia and leaves Iraqis to define their own fate.
Of the four withdrawals, arguably the 1982-1984 American intervention in Lebanon marks the closest parallel to Iraq today.
A country torn by sectarian violence beginning in 1975, Lebanon pitted an even more complex array of contestants against each other than Iraq does today.
Into this fray stepped the US and its Western allies. Their objective was to create a military buffer between the PLO and Israeli forces that were then fighting in Beirut in order to promote the departure of both.
The massacres in Palestinian refugee camps prompted a new commitment to “restore a strong and central government” to Lebanon, to quote President Ronald Reagan.
But the result of intervention was that US forces became just one more target, culminating in the 1983 bombing of a US Marine barracks that killed 241 American soldiers.
A similar suicide bombing two days later claimed the lives of 58 French soldiers.
In February 1984, facing a quagmire, Reagan acceded to Vice President George H.W. Bush’s recommendation to get out of Lebanon.
But the withdrawal of Western forces did not stop the fighting.
The civil war continued for another six years, followed by a bumpy political aftermath: Syrian intervention and expulsion (two decades later), as the Lebanese defined their own fate with the US exercising only background influence.
In 1992, the sirens of Somalia’s political collapse lured the US into another civil war to save a country from itself.
The US humanitarian mission to that benighted country sought to salvage a failed United Nations enterprise to secure and feed Somalia’s ravaged population.
The US committed 28,000 troops, which for a time imposed a modicum of security.
But ill-equipped and poorly led UN replacement forces for the American presence put the remaining US troops in the bull’s eye as they attempted to bring to justice the Somali warlord responsible for the death of Pakistani peacekeepers.
The ensuing bloodbath of US soldiers generated images that the American public could not stomach, prompting the exit of American and then UN forces.
As unrest mounted with these military retreats, offshore US forces monitored and intercepted jihadists who sought to enter Somalia, while Kenya and Ethiopia blocked the unrest from metastasizing across the region.
In 2006, the capture of Somalia’s capital, Mogadishu, by the Islamic Courts raised the specter of a jihadist state.
But Somalia soon demonstrated that quagmires can be a two-way street.
Following Ethiopia’s intervention, the Islamists found themselves out of power.
Today, Somalia remains a dysfunctional state, as rival clans, jihadists, and an interim government with Ethiopian support compete for power.
The US, now out of the quagmire, exercises limited influence from afar.
While Lebanon and Somalia remain damaged and failed states, respectively, regional and domestic factors have cauterized the consequences of America’s retreat from Vietnam and Southeast Asia. The result is the stable region that the world sees today.
But the US saw things very differently in the 1960’s, when the ghosts of Munich hovered over Vietnam’s jungles.
As President George W. Bush argued about the war in Iraq, US President Lyndon Johnson predicted that defeat in Vietnam “would be renewed in one country and then another.”
What Johnson failed to foresee were the domestic and regional constraints that would prevent the dominos from falling in the way he predicted.
Although the US bombed northeastern Cambodia intensely throughout the Vietnam War years, it had no stomach for a ground commitment there.
Still within congressional restraints, the Nixon administration attempted to bolster Cambodia’s military government.
But, despite modest material support, the US could not sustain a government that could not sustain itself.
Rather than the dominos falling following America’s retreat from Saigon in 1975, a Vietnam-Cambodian War ensued.
This in turn stimulated China’s unsuccessful intervention in North Vietnam.
The withdrawal by all of these invading armies to the recognized international boundaries demonstrated that nationalist forces were dominant in the region, not communist solidarity.
None of these American exits was without consequence.
But, while the US suffered costs to its reputation around the world, the supposed advantages from this for America’s opponents proved illusory.
America’s departure from Mesopotamia will likewise put the burden of problem solving onto Iraqis and other regional players, leaving the US offshore to assist when and where it deems appropriate.
History suggests that, in fits and starts, Iraq, like Vietnam and Lebanon, will find itself able to sort out its own affairs.
Trump’s Deplorables
NEW YORK – Hillary Clinton, the Democratic US presidential nominee, recently described supporters of her opponent, Donald Trump, as a “basket of deplorables.”
It was neither a tactful nor an elegant phrase, and she later apologized for her remark.
But she was more right than wrong.
Trump has attracted many supporters whose views on race, for example, are indeed deplorable.
The problem is that many of these deplorable voters are also relatively uneducated, which makes Clinton’s remark look snobbish.
Alas, the United States has too many relatively uneducated people.
Among developed countries, the US ranks low in terms of literacy, general knowledge, and science.
Japanese, South Koreans, Dutch, Canadians, and Russians score consistently higher.
This is at least partly the result of leaving education too much to the market: those with money are highly educated, and those with insufficient means are not educated enough.
So far, it seems clear that Clinton appeals to better-educated urban voters, while Trump attracts mainly less-educated white men, many of whom in earlier generations would have been Democrat-voting coal miners or industrial workers.
Does this mean that there is a link between education – or the lack of it – and the appeal of a dangerous demagogue?
One of the most remarkable things about Trump is the extent of his own ignorance, despite his high educational attainment, and the fact that he seems to benefit from flaunting it.
Perhaps it is easier for a loud-mouthed ignoramus to convince large numbers of people whose knowledge of the world is as slight as his own.
But this is to assume that factual truth matters in the rhetoric of a populist agitator.
Many of his supporters don’t seem to care much about reasoned argument – that is for the liberal snobs.
Emotions count more, and the prime emotions that demagogues manipulate, in the US and elsewhere, are fear, resentment, and distrust.
This was also true in Germany when Hitler came to power.
But the Nazi Party in its early days did not find the bulk of its support among the least educated.
Germany was more highly educated than other countries, on average, and the most enthusiastic Nazis included schoolteachers, engineers, and doctors, as well as provincial small businessmen, white-collar workers, and farmers.
Urban factory workers and conservative Catholics were, on the whole, less susceptible to Hitler’s blandishments than many more highly educated Protestants.
Low educational standards do not explain Hitler’s rise.
Fear, resentment, and distrust ran very high in Weimar Germany, after the humiliation of wartime defeat and amid a devastating economic depression.
But the racial prejudices whipped up by Nazi propagandists were not the same as the ones we see among many Trump supporters today.
The Jews were seen as a sinister force that was dominating the elite professions: bankers, professors, lawyers, news media, or entertainment.
They were the so-called back-stabbers who prevented Germany from being great again.
The Trump supporters are showing a similar animus against symbols of the elite, such as Wall Street bankers, “mainstream” media, and Washington insiders.
But their xenophobia is directed against poor Mexican immigrants, blacks, or Middle Eastern refugees, who are perceived as freeloaders depriving honest (read white) Americans of their rightful place in the social pecking order.
It is a question of relatively underprivileged people in a globalizing, increasingly multi-cultural world, resenting those who are even less privileged.
In the US today, as in the Weimar Republic, the resentful and the fearful have so little trust in prevailing political and economic institutions that they follow a leader who promises maximum disruption.
By cleaning out the stables, it is hoped, greatness will return.
In Hitler’s Germany, this hope existed among all classes, whether elite or plebeian.
In Trump’s America, it thrives mostly among the latter.
In the US and Europe, today’s world looks less scary to more affluent and better educated voters, who benefit from open borders, cheap migrant labor, information technology, and a rich mixture of cultural influences.
Likewise, immigrants and ethnic minorities who seek to improve their lot have no interest in joining a populist rebellion directed mainly against them, which is why they will vote for Clinton.
Trump must thus rely on disaffected white Americans who feel that they are being left behind.
The fact that enough people feel that way to sustain such an unsuitable presidential candidate is an indictment of US society.
This does have something to do with education – not because well-educated people are immune to demagogy, but because a broken education system leaves too many people at a disadvantage.
In the past, there were enough industrial jobs for less-educated voters to make a decent living.
Now that those jobs are vanishing in post-industrial societies, too many people feel that they have nothing more to lose.
This is true in many countries, but it matters more in the US, where putting a bigoted demagogue in charge would do great damage not only to that country, but also to all countries trying to hold onto their freedoms in an increasingly perilous world.
America’s Exploding Deficit
CAMBRIDGE – Two recent pieces of budget news are a grim reminder of the perilous state of fiscal policy in the United States.
President Barack Obama’s Office of Management and Budget announced that the federal government’s deficit this fiscal year will be about $600 billion, up by $162 billion from 2015, an increase of more than 35%.
And the annual Long-Term Budget Outlook produced by the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) predicts that, with no change in fiscal policy, federal government debt will rise from 75% of GDP to 86% a decade from now, and then to a record 141% in 2046, near levels in Italy, Portugal, and Greece.
Although the US debt-to-GDP ratio doubled in the past decade, the Obama administration and Congress ignored the problem, focusing instead on the annual deficit’s decline since 2012 and the relative stability of the deficit as a share of GDP.
The Federal Reserve’s unconventional monetary policy has driven down the cost of the net interest on the federal debt to just 1.4% of GDP, despite the increase in the volume of the debt.
But as interest rates normalize and the volume of debt grows, the cost of servicing the interest on the national debt is projected to increase to 5.8% of GDP.
That projected interest cost may be much less than it would actually be if the rest of the deficit and debt forecast turns out to be correct.
With a federal debt of 141% of GDP, that 5.8%-of-GDP interest cost implies an average nominal interest rate of just 4% and, given the CBO’s inflation forecast, a real interest rate of about 2% – similar to historic rates when the debt ratio was less than 40% of GDP.
But investors in Treasury bonds might demand a much higher interest rate in exchange for loading up their portfolios with US debt.
In that case, the interest cost and the debt would be much greater.
The fact that more than half of the publicly held US government debt is now owned by foreign investors might make the interest rate even more sensitive to the debt’s relative size.
Foreign investors might fear that the government could adopt policies that reduced the real value of their holdings.
While the US government would never explicitly default, it could adopt policies such as deducting income tax on interest payments, which would disadvantage foreign holders and depress the value of the bonds.
Moreover, foreign investors might fear that very high debt levels could lead to inflationary monetary policy, which would depreciate the value of the dollar and lower the real value of their bonds.
Here is an amazing and disturbing implication of the CBO’s forecast.
By 2046, the projected outlays for the “mandatory” entitlement programs (Social Security and the major health programs), plus interest on the debt, would absorb more than all of the revenue that the government would collect with current tax rates.
A small deficit (1.6% of GDP) would emerge even before spending on defense and other annually appropriated “discretionary” programs.
There is no way to offset the growth of the mandatory programs by slowing the growth of defense and other discretionary outlays.
Total defense spending is now just 3.2% of GDP and is expected to decline to 2.6% over the next ten years and to remain at that level for the next 20 years.
That would be the lowest defense share of GDP since before World War II.
The same reduction is projected for all non-defense discretionary programs, also a record-low share of GDP.
The bright spot in this bleak picture is that it would not take much in terms of annual deficit reductions to prevent the rise in the debt ratio, or even to bring it back to where it was a decade ago.
Reducing the annual deficit by 1.7% of GDP by any combination of reduced spending and higher revenue would, if begun in 2017, prevent an increase from the current 75% debt-to-GDP ratio.
And reducing the deficit by 3% a year would reverse the debt trajectory and bring it back to where it was in the decades before the recession.
Neither of the presidential candidates has indicated either a plan or an inclination to reverse the projected rise in the national debt.
But it should be a top priority for whoever moves into the White House next year.
Given the need to act quickly to avoid the worst-case scenario, there is no excuse for waiting.
America’s Anti-Environmentalists
As an American, I am appalled, ashamed, and embarrassed by my country’s lack of leadership in dealing with global warming.
Scientific evidence on the risks mounts by the day, as most recently documented in England’s magisterial Stern Report .
Yet, despite the fact that the United States accounts for roughly 25% of all man-made global carbon emissions, Americans show little will or inclination to temper their manic consumption.
The first George W. Bush administration was probably right to refuse to sign the so-called “Kyoto Protocol,” albeit for the wrong reasons.
Among other problems, the Kyoto Protocol does not go far enough towards redistributing carbon emission rights towards developing countries.
But why can’t the US bring itself to raise taxes on gasoline and other sources of carbon emission like coal burning power plants?
It is not like the US government, running a huge deficit despite an economic boom, does not need the money.
Many people seem to think that the Bush administration is the problem.
Put a Texas oilman and his buddies in charge and what do you expect, conservation?
Unfortunately, that is a facile excuse.
American citizens’ resistance to moderating energy consumption for the sake of the global environment is much more deeply embedded.
Consider former US Vice President Al Gore, for example, whose documentary film on global warming, An Inconvenient Truth , is celebrated for its unflinching look at how fossil fuel consumption is leading mankind to the brink of catastrophe.
The evidence on global warming is considerably more muddled than Gore’s film suggests, but the basic problem is real.
Unfortunately, however, Gore was not successful in carrying the torch on global warming when he was a politician.
One cannot commend the 1990’s Clinton-Gore administration for taking any brave steps aimed at radically reducing carbon emissions.
Small wonder: the American public is fiercely resistant to anything that seriously forces them to compromise on their energy-burning, gas-guzzling lifestyle.
It is not just politicians who have failed to provide leadership here.
The venerable
Until Americans suck it up and start fixing global environmental problems that they, more than anyone, have caused, it will be difficult to get the wholehearted support of the rest of the world.
Developing countries ask why they should pay attention to global warming if rich countries are not prepared to curtail their own emissions sharply?
Why should poor countries worry about how deforestation contributes to global warming when rich countries remain so profligate?
The scientific evidence suggests that carbon emissions from anywhere in the world have about the same impact on global warming.
For this reason, a wide range of economists favor a uniform (“harmonized”) global tax that would tax carbon emissions equally everywhere in the world, and from whatever source – whether coal, oil, or gas, and whether consumers or businesses.
Such a tax is the most flexible and market-friendly approach, and would have the least impact on economic growth.
Instead, the complex system of quotas favored by the Europeans and embodied in the Kyoto Protocol is likely to lead to much larger inefficiencies and costs.
For this reason, England’s Stern Report is probably far too optimistic when it calculates that an eclectic approach to reducing carbon emissions will cost the world only 1% per year of income.
But the Stern Report is still right to argue that the potential risks of continued inaction are far greater.
America’s unwillingness to take the lead on environmental issues may some day be regarded as one of the country’s most profound political failures.
One hopes that it changes course soon, before we all are forced to wear swimsuits to work.
A New Low for China Bashing
NEW HAVEN – As America’s election season nears its finish, the debate seems to have come unhinged.
Nowhere is that more evident than in the fixation on China – singled out by both President Barack Obama and his Republican challenger, Mitt Romney, as a major source of pressure bearing down on American workers and their families.
Get tough with China, both stressed in the presidential debates, and the pain will ease.
Nothing could be further from the truth. Consider the following charges:
Currency manipulation.
Since China reformed its exchange-rate regime in July 2005, the renminbi has risen 32% relative to the dollar and about 30% in inflation-adjusted terms against a broad basket of currencies.
These are hardly trivial amounts, and more renminbi appreciation can be expected in the years to come.
Unlike Japan, which was pressured by the West into a large yen revaluation in 1985 (the “Plaza Accord”), the Chinese have opted to move gradually and deliberately.
American officials call this “manipulation,” arguing that market forces would have resulted in a sharper renminbi appreciation than has occurred.
Fixated on stability – a concept alien to US politicians and policymakers – the Chinese prefer, instead, to play a more active role in managing the adjustment of their currency.
I call that prudence – perhaps even wisdom.
Two lost decades later, the guinea pig, Japan, might have a view on which approach works best.
Outsourcing and intellectual property.
Notwithstanding some recent modest improvements in the US labor market, America’s job situation remains terrible.
Private-sector employment is still down 4.1 million from its January 2008 peak.
Yet there is not a shred of evidence to support bipartisan claims that this ongoing carnage is the result of outsourcing US manufacturing jobs to China.
While the manufacturing sector’s share of private employment fell from 11.9% in January 2008 to 10.7% in September 2012, this is only a small portion of the enormous secular decline since the early 1970’s, when manufacturing accounted for more than 30% of private-sector employment.
Weak demand – especially the post-crisis collapse in consumer spending growth – is a far more likely culprit than China in explaining the recent hiring shortfall.
China, for its part, has become a major workhorse of globalization – an assembly hub for inputs produced by multi-country supply chains and an offshore efficiency solution for hard-pressed Western multinational corporations.
About 50% of all exports leaving China have been processed previously by other economies, and close to 60% are shipped by Chinese subsidiaries of “foreign-invested enterprises.”
While these trends benefit Chinese workers, they also support America and other countries by holding down inflation and making it possible for their companies to cope with tough competitive pressures. They allow beleaguered American families to stretch their paychecks (think Wal-Mart).
And they have not stopped innovative Western companies from putting their intellectual property and new technologies on the line in China in order to deliver spectacular new products to US customers (think Apple).
The trade deficit.
Yes, the US runs a massive trade deficit with China – around $295 billion in 2011, or fully 40% of America’s total merchandise trade gap of $738 billion.
Republicans and Democrats alike argue that this is the crux of America’s jobs problem.
After all, trade deficits mean job losses.
Because the biggest share of the US trade gap is with China, a country vilified as a currency-manipulating cheater, the bilateral trade deficit has become the lightening rod for China bashers.
It is what has driven Obama to go to the mat with China on recent disputes within the World Trade Organization and on restrictions on Chinese investment in Oregon wind farms, and what has led to saber-rattling by Romney on currency manipulation and trade sanctions.
But neither candidate acknowledges the much bigger elephant in the room.
In 2011, the US had trade deficits with 98 countries.
The other 97 deficits did not magically appear.
They are all part of an enormous multilateral trade deficit that stems from America’s unprecedented shortfall of saving – a depreciation-adjusted “net national saving rate” (combining businesses, households, and the government sector) that has been negative since 2008.
Lacking in savings and wanting to grow, the US runs massive current-account and multilateral trade deficits in order to import other countries’ surplus savings.
This goes to the heart of the folly of China bashing.
No leading country in world history has persistently maintained a negative saving rate.
Trade deficits – with China or any other country – are part of the price that America pays for its unbridled profligacy.
Unless and until the US faces up to its chronic aversion to saving – namely, by reducing massive federal budget deficits and encouraging the rebuilding of severely depleted household saving – multilateral trade deficits will persist.
Simple arithmetic and basic economics tell us that a multilateral problem cannot be addressed by a bilateral solution.
Politicians have a penchant for simple and powerful messages.
Yet those messages are often more spin than substance.
American families are hurting, and elected officials want to pin the blame on China, thereby deflecting attention from the difficult task of rebuilding saving, restoring competitiveness, and living within the country’s means.
Indeed, one could argue that it is the American public that is being manipulated by the erroneous charges leveled at China.
Fortunately, the campaign season is nearly over.
Left unanswered, however, is what comes next.
China bashers typically change their tune after a presidential election.
But there is nothing typical about the pressures that are likely to continue squeezing American families long after November 6.
Both Obama and Romney run the risk of painting themselves into a corner when it comes to China.
That could take all of us to the edge of a slippery slope.
America’s leaders need to come clean with the American people – before it is too late.
America’s Coming Social Democracy?
Almost all of the world’s developed countries consider themselves, and are, social democracies: mixed economies with very large governments performing a wide array of welfare and social insurance functions, and removing large chunks of wealth and commodity distribution from the market.
The United States is something different. Or is it?
Whatever it has been in the past, the US in the future will have to choose whether, and how much, it will be a social democracy.
Once upon a time, according to mythology at least, America had little downward mobility.
On the contrary, before the Civil War you could start out splitting rails, light out for the Western Territory, make a success of yourself on the frontier, and wind up as President – if you were named Abraham Lincoln.
In the generation after World War II, you could secure a blue-collar unionized manufacturing job or climb to the top of a white collar bureaucracy that offered job security, relatively high salaries, and long, stable career ladders.
This was always half myth.
Setting out for the Western Territory was expensive. Covered wagons were not cheap.
Even in the first post-WWII generation, only a minority of Americans – a largely white, male minority – found well-paying stable jobs at large, unionized, capital-intensive manufacturing companies like GM, GE, or AT&T.
But if this story was half myth, it was also half true, particularly in the years after WWII.
Largely independent of education or family, those Americans who did value stability and security could grasp it in the form of jobs with “a future.”
Even for those not so lucky, economic risks were usually fairly low: the unemployment rate for married men during the 1960’s averaged 2.7%, and finding a new job was a relatively simple matter.
It was during this era – roughly from 1948 to 1973 – that sociologists found that a majority of Americans had come to define themselves not as working class, but as middle class.
The post-WWII period stands as a reference point in America’s collective memory, but it was in all likelihood an aberration.
In the early postwar decades, foreign competition exerted virtually no pressure on the economy, owing to the isolation of America’s continental market from the devastation of WWII.
At the same time, the war left enormous pent-up demand for the products of mass production: cars, washing machines, refrigerators, lawn mowers, television sets, and more.
Government policy back then began with a permanent military program of spending and R&D and continued through massive public works program and suburbanization, underpinned by the Federal Highway Program and subsidized home ownership loans from the Federal Housing Administration.
The regulatory institutions and behavioral norms that originated in the New Deal and developed during WWII came into full force: social security, a system of unionized labor relations, market regulation.
Favorable macroeconomic circumstances, the absence of foreign competition, a system of government support and regulation, and large-scale private provision of what in Europe would have been public social insurance all combined to give post-WWII America many of social democracy’s benefits without the costs. The economy did not stagger under the weight of ample benefits or high taxes.
Americans – at least white, male Americans – did not have to worry about tradeoffs between security and opportunity, because the US offered the advantages of both.
Corporate welfare capitalism substituted for what in Europe would have been government provided social democracy.
America was thus a special place.
It had its cake and ate it, too: a combination of security with opportunity and entrepreneurship.
It seemed that this was the natural order of things.
Hence there was little pressure for government-sponsored social democracy: Why bother?
What would it add?
Now things are very different.
The typical American employer is no longer General Motors.
It is Wal-Mart.
Private businesses are providing their workers with less and less in the form of defined-benefit pensions, health insurance, and other forms of insurance against life’s economic risks.
Sharply rising income inequality has raised the stakes of the economic game.
A government that cannot balance its own finances cannot be relied on to provide macroeconomic stability.
Indeed, former Chairman of the US Federal Reserve Paul Volcker sees the US as so macroeconomically vulnerable as to be running a 75% chance of a full-fledged dollar crisis over the next several years.
The coming generation will be one of massive downward mobility for many Americans.
The political struggles that this generates will determine whether America will move more closely to the social democratic norm for developed countries, or find some way to accept and rationalize its existence as a country of high economic risk and deep divisions of income and wealth.
Syria and September 11
PARIS – By chance, it appears that the US Congress will decide on or around September 11 whether to endorse President Barack Obama’s proposal to respond militarily to the Syrian government’s use of poison gas against civilians.
The shadow of two previous events that took place on September 11 looms over the outcome – indeed, over the fact that the question is even being considered at all.
Long before September 11 became a day of infamy in the United States, it acquired similar significance in Chile, where 40 years ago, on September 11, 1973, the armed forces, led by General Augusto Pinochet, overthrew the country’s democratically elected government.
More than any other event of our era, that violent coup was responsible for launching both the contemporary global movement for human rights and the American movement to promote human rights internationally.
In part, this reflected the new regime’s cruelty.
More than three thousand people were murdered or “disappeared” during Pinochet’s rule, thousands more were tortured by his forces, and tens of thousands were forcibly exiled.
To an even greater extent, however, the motivation that spurred the human-rights movement was revulsion worldwide, including in the US, against American aid to Pinochet’s forces, a policy directed by President Richard Nixon and Secretary of State Henry Kissinger.
In the US, members of Congress turned the coup into a platform for efforts to promote human rights.
They condemned developments in Chile, held hearings about the importance of promoting human rights, and adopted legislation – over President Gerald Ford’s veto – requiring that human-rights standards guide US foreign policy.
A slightly revised version of that legislation remains in force.
Obama’s proclamation that the use of chemical weapons in Syria would cross a “red line” – and his implicit threat to use force if that line were crossed – reflects the commitment that the US has made during the past four decades to promote human rights worldwide.
The events of September 11, 2001, are also playing a crucial role in deciding the question of a punitive strike against Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s regime.
One consequence of the terrorist attacks 12 years ago is that Americans and others in the West became aware that developments in the Middle East could affect their own safety and security.
Initially, the attacks unleashed a strong desire to retaliate, which later gave way to caution about intervention, owing to unforeseen consequences.
In Britain, continuing intense resentment over the deceptions that led to the country’s engagement in the Iraq war seems to be the main reason for Parliament’s refusal to back a strike against Syria.
Wariness of another Middle East war has also underpinned Obama’s unwillingness to go beyond a one-time punitive strike on Syria – with some in Congress opposed to even that.
Though Congress must guard against repeating its disastrous mistake in 2003, when it supported the war in Iraq, the commitment to promote human rights that the US made following September 11, 1973, seems a more appropriate standard for weighing Obama’s proposal for US military action in Syria.
Maintaining the international prohibition on the use of chemical weapons is an urgent concern.
The Assad regime’s culpability for using these weapons is not in doubt.
If the US Congress deals with Obama’s proposal responsibly, and does not yield to those motivated by a partisan desire to embarrass him at every turn, it will enhance its own claim to recapture the constitutional power to authorize military conflict – a power that has been disregarded more often than not in the past half-century.
A critical part of its role must be to consider with care the limits that should be placed on a punitive strike.
The war in Iraq was misconceived from the start, because it was an attempt to avenge the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks by invading and occupying a country that had no part in them.
Obama’s proposal to strike Syria, by contrast, is an attempt to enforce an important human-rights norm by directly punishing – through means that do not involve invasion and occupation – those who committed a gross violation.
It restores human rights to the central place in American foreign policy set forth after September 11, 1973.
America’s Constrained Choice
NEWPORT BEACH – The conventional wisdom about the November presidential election in the United States is only partly correct.
Yes, economic issues will play a large role in determining the outcome.
But the next step in the argument – that the winner of an increasingly ugly contest will have the luxury of pursuing significantly different policies from his opponent – is much more uncertain.
By the time the next presidential term starts in January 2013, and contrary to the current narratives advanced by the Obama and Romney campaigns, the incumbent will find himself with limited room for maneuver on economic policy.
Indeed, the potential differences for America are elsewhere, and have yet to be adequately understood by voters.
They center on the social policies that would accompany a broadly similar set of economic measures; and, here, the differences between the candidates are consequential.
Whoever wins will face an economy growing at a sluggish 2% or less next year, with a nagging risk of stalling completely.
Unemployment will still be far too high, and almost half of it will be hard-to-solve, long-term joblessness – and even more if we count (as we should) the millions of Americans who have dropped out of the labor force.
The financial side of the economy will also be a source of concern.
The fiscal deficit will continue to flirt with the 10%-of-GDP level, adding to worries about the country’s medium-term debt dynamics.
The banking sector will still be “de-risking,” limiting the flow of credit to small and medium-size companies and undermining hiring and investment in plant and equipment.
And the household sector will be only partly through its painful de-leveraging phase.
The policy front will be equally unsettling.
Having dithered and bickered for too long, the US Congress will find it increasingly difficult to postpone action on these challenges.
Meanwhile, the Federal Reserve’s unusual activism, including an ever-expanding list of experimental measures, will yield fewer benefits and entail growing costs and risks.
The US economy will also be operating in a more difficult global environment.
In the next few months, Europe’s debt crisis will most likely worsen.
With emerging economies (including China) slowing, and with meaningful multilateral policy coordination remaining inadequate, protectionist pressures will mount as major trading powers compete for a stagnant pie.
So, whether President Barack Obama or Mitt Romney prevails in November, the next president will be constrained by the twin need for urgent economic stabilization and longer-term reforms.
And, with headwinds from Europe and a synchronized global slowdown, the candidates will have no choice but to pursue, at least initially, similar economic policies to restore dynamic job creation and financial stability.
In striking the right balance between immediate economic stimulus and medium-term fiscal sustainability, the most urgent step will be to counter properly the looming fiscal cliff, as temporary tax cuts expire and deep, across-the-board spending reductions kick in automatically.
Failure to do so would significantly increase the risk of an outright American recession.
Serious medium-term budget reforms are needed to deal with the legacy of repeated congressional failures.
And, if provided with realistic numbers, the next president will soon recognize that the right mix of tax and spending reforms falls into a much narrower range than today’s competing political narratives suggest.
It is certainly not an either/or proposition.
Fiscal reforms work best in a dynamic economy.
To this end, Obama and Romney will need to lift the impediments to growth and job creation.
Here again – in areas like housing, the labor market, credit intermediation, and infrastructure – there is less room for maneuver than most politicians would like us to believe.
But this does not mean that there is no scope for differences.
There is, and they reflect the fact that general economic tendencies will be accompanied by multi-speed dynamics at many levels.
From persistent differences in unemployment rates depending on skills and education to record-high income and wealth inequalities, each economic decision will be accompanied by the need for social judgment – whether explicit or, more likely, implicit – regarding its distributional impact.
After an “age” of excessive leverage, debt creation, and credit entitlement that culminated in the 2008 global financial crisis, America still faces the tricky challenge of allocating cumulative losses that continuously inhibit investment, jobs, and competitiveness.
Until now, Congress’s excessive political polarization has translated into an approach that has pushed more of the burden of adjustment onto those who are less able to bear it.
In an ideal world, America’s next president would rapidly embark on a two-step approach to restoring job dynamism and financial soundness.
First, he would devise a comprehensive set of economic-policy initiatives that are both feasible and desirable – and, again, the scope for major differences here is limited.
Second, he would accompany this with an explicit set of social policies – and here the potential differences are profound – that addresses the need for equitable burden-sharing.
This is not really an election about such hotly-debated issues as outsourcing, tax increases versus entitlement reforms, government control of production versus unfettered private sector activity, or job creators versus free riders.
It is much more about the accompanying concepts of social fairness, entitlement, equality and, yes, standards of behavior for a rich and civilized society.
This is an election about social responsibility – a society’s obligation to support those who are struggling, through no fault of their own, to find jobs and make ends meet.
It is about protecting the most vulnerable segments of society, including by providing them access to proper health coverage.
It is about reforming an education system that fails America’s young people (and about providing appropriate retraining to those who need it).
Among the numerous issues of fairness and equality, it is about the rich giving back to a system that has brought them unimaginable wealth.
It is here where the differences between Obama and Romney are important.
The sooner the campaign debate pivots to this, the greater the probability that Americans will make a more informed choice and, thus, buy into the collective effort needed to escape national malaise.
America’s Crony Capitalism
Buenos Aires – For 20 years, Americans have denounced the “crony capitalism” of Third World countries, especially in Asia.
But, just as those regions have been improving their public and corporate governance – Hong Kong just witnessed a breakthrough court decision against a telecom tycoon who is the son of the province’s richest and most powerful man – crony capitalism is taking root in the United States, a country that the world long considered the gold standard of a level playing field in business.
The recently completed “stress tests” of US banks are but the latest indication that crony capitalists have now captured Washington, DC.  
It is no surprise that stock markets liked the results of the stress tests that US Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner administered to America’s big banks, for the general outcome had been leaked weeks before.
Indeed, most professional investors trashed the tests as dishonest even as their holdings benefited from a rising market.
Even The Wall Street Journal , usually financial markets’ loudest cheerleader, openly disparaged the tests’ integrity. The government had allowed bankers to “negotiate” the results, like a student taking a final examination and then negotiating her grade.
The tests were supposed to reveal the true conditions of banks saddled with unaudited toxic assets in housing loans and financial derivatives. The reasoning behind the tests seemed unimpeachable.
But was it?
As any seasoned banker knows, a well-managed bank should undertake internal “stress tests” regularly as a matter of good housekeeping.
The financial crisis should have mandated a running stress test to keep senior management up to date daily. Why, then, did the US need the government to conduct a financial exercise that bankers themselves could and should have done far better and faster?
The truth is that the tests were not designed to find answers.
Both Wall Street’s chieftains and the Obama administration already knew the truth.
They knew that if the true conditions at many big banks were publicly revealed, many would have been immediately declared bankrupt, necessitating government receivership to stop a tsunami of bank runs.
But the Obama administration did not want to be tagged as “socialist” for nationalizing banks, however temporarily, even though experts such as former US Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker had recommended just that.
Moreover, nationalizing banks would have required dismissing Wall Street captains and their boards for grossly mismanaging their firms.
Wall Street’s titans, however, had convinced Obama and his team that their continued stewardship was essential to getting the world out of its crisis.
They successfully portrayed themselves as victims of a firestorm, rather than as accessories to arson.
Geithner and Larry Summers, Obama’s chief economic advisor, share Wall Street’s culture as protégés of Robert Rubin, the former treasury secretary who went on to serve as a director and senior counselor at Citigroup. Neither man found it difficult to accept the bankers’ absurd logic.
The stress tests were meant to signal to the public that there was no immediate threat of bank failures.
This message, it was hoped, would stabilize the market so that prices for “toxic” assets could rise to a level at which bankers might feel comfortable selling them.
After all, senior bankers had been claiming that these assets were “mispriced,” and that pricing them at market levels would penalize the banks unnecessarily.
So far, Geithner seems to have succeeded in his “tests,” as the stock market has indeed more than stabilized, with prices of bank shares such as Citigroup and Bank of America quadrupling from their lows.
The feared implosion of Wall Street seems to have been avoided.
But no one ever seriously thought that the US would allow Citigroup and Bank of America, to name just two, to fail.
In fact, the stock market bottomed out last winter.
Markets had factored into share prices the belief that the US government would not allow any more banks to collapse.
What the world wanted was an accurate picture of what the banks were worth and “mark-to-market” valuations to guide investors as to how much new capital they needed.
The world also wanted to see the US retaking the high road in reinforcing business ethics and integrity – so lacking under the last administration.
As taxpayers had already put huge sums into rescuing failing banks, with the prospect of more to come, a transparent process to reveal how the money was being used was imperative.
Substantial public rescue funds have reportedly been siphoned off to foreign banks, Goldman Sachs, and staff bonuses for purposes unrelated to protecting public interests.
None of this was either revealed or debunked by Geithner’s tests.
Instead, public servants now appear to be in cahoots with Wall Street to engineer an artificial aura of profitability.
Moreover, the value of toxic assets remains as murky as ever.
Once sacrosanct accounting principles have been amended at Wall Street’s behest in order to allow banks to report essentially whatever they want.
And now negotiated stress test results have been released to “prove” that the banks are a lot healthier.
Calling this a Ponzi scheme might be too harsh.
But few financial professionals have been fooled.
Meanwhile, Wall Street chieftains and their boards of directors have nothing to fear from government. On the contrary, they are now the government’s partners in a joint venture to manage this dishonest scheme.
Like swine flu, crony capitalism has migrated from corrupt Third World countries to America, once the citadel of sound public and private governance.
Is it any wonder that China is perceived as an increasingly credible model for much of the developing world, while the US is now viewed as a symbol of hypocrisy and double standards?
America’s Dangerous Debt Ceiling Debate
NEWPORT BEACH – It has been raised more than 70 times in the last 50 years, mostly without commotion.
It must be raised again this summer if the United States government is to continue paying its bills on time.
But now America’s debt ceiling has become the subject of intense political posturing and touch-and-go negotiations behind closed doors. And, obviously, the outcome has implications that go well beyond the US.
As part of America’s system of checks and balances, Congress gets to do more than just approve the annual federal budget. It also sets a limit on how much debt the US Treasury is allowed to issue.
Beyond this ceiling, the government can spend only from current revenues.
US Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner recently informed members of Congress that the government will be in this situation on or around August 2.
Having already officially hit the ceiling, the Treasury is moving money around and tapping various pots of unused funds to pay its bills.
In a few weeks, this “flexibility” will be used up.
With the US government now borrowing around 40% of every dollar it spends, a truly binding debt ceiling would immediately force the government to reduce spending radically and in a disorderly fashion.
Politicians across the political spectrum know that such a situation would unsettle an already fragile US economy, severely weaken the dollar, and raise serious concerns about the country's ability to meet its debt-service obligations, including to the many foreign creditors that the US will need in the future.
Yet, in today’s polarized environment in Washington, Republicans and Democrats are unwilling to compromise – or at least to compromise “too early.”
By holding out, Republicans wish to force President Barack Obama’s administration into massive spending cuts.
Democrats respond that such a one-sided approach would be economically harmful and socially unjust.
In the meantime, both sides risk disrupting transfer payments (including to the elderly) and the provision of public services, as well as eroding further America’s global credit standing.
The overwhelming – and sensible – expectation is that the two parties will compromise and raise the debt ceiling before inflicting serious economic and financial dislocations.
The most recent precedent was the bipartisan agreement reached earlier this year on another fiscal issue that threatened to disrupt the normal functioning of government: the absence of a formally approved budget for this year.
A compromise would allow both parties to declare partial victory, for it would likely entail commitments to cut spending and some steps to make taxation more socially just.
But, like many last-minute agreements, it would have little durable impact.
In effect, the political system would again be kicking the can down the road, with real progress on necessary fiscal reforms expected only after the November 2012 presidential election.
Two scenarios for the timing of an interim compromise are possible, depending on whether it is a one- or two-step process. Most observers expect a one-step process for bipartisan agreement before August 2.
But politicians may need two steps: an initial failure to agree, and then a quick deal in response to the resulting financial-market convulsions.
In the meantime, the Treasury would temporarily re-prioritize and slow outgoing payments.
This two-step process would be similar to what happened in 2008, when Congress was confronted with another cliffhanger: the Bush administration’s request for $700 billion to prevent a financial-market collapse and an economic depression.
Congress initially rejected the measure, but a dramatic 770-point drop in the stock market focused politicians’ minds, bringing them back to the table – and to agreement.
But the two-step scenario involves incremental risks to the US economy, and to its standing in the global system. And the longer America’s politicians take to resolve the debt-ceiling issue, the greater the risk of an inadvertent accident.
This brings us to a third, and even more unsettling possibility: a longer and more protracted negotiation, resulting in greater disruptions to government entitlement payments, other contractual obligations, and public services.
Creditors would then ask many more questions before adding to their already-considerable holdings of US government debt, generating still more headwinds in a US economy that already faces an unemployment crisis and uneven growth.
The next few weeks will provide plenty of political drama.
The baseline expectation, albeit subject to risk, is that Democrats and Republicans will find a way to avoid disruptions that would damage the fragile US economy, but that the compromise will not meaningfully address the need for sensible medium-term fiscal reforms.
Such political paralysis on key economic issues is increasingly unsettling for the US private sector, and for other countries that rely on a strong US at the core of the global economy.
This helps to explain why so many companies continue to hoard cash, rather than investing domestically, and why a growing number of countries want to diversify gradually away from dependence on the dollar as the reserve currency and on US financial markets for intermediation of their hard-earned savings.
The world economy is hard-wired to the assumption of a strong America, and Americans benefit from this.
But the more their politicians argue over the debt ceiling, the greater the risk that the wiring will become irreparably frayed.
America’s Deepening Moral Crisis
NEW YORK – America’s political and economic crisis is set to worsen following the upcoming November elections.
President Barack Obama will lose any hope for passing progressive legislation aimed at helping the poor or the environment.
Indeed, all major legislation and reforms are likely to be stalemated until 2013, following a new presidential election.
An already bad situation marked by deadlock and vitriol is likely to worsen, and the world should not expect much leadership from a bitterly divided United States.
Much of America is in a nasty mood, and the language of compassion has more or less been abandoned.
Both political parties serve their rich campaign contributors, while proclaiming that they defend the middle class.
Neither party even mentions the poor, who now officially make up 15% of the population but in fact are even more numerous, when we count all those households struggling with health care, housing, jobs, and other needs.
The Republican Party recently issued a “Pledge to America” to explain its beliefs and campaign promises.
The document is filled with nonsense, such as the fatuous claim that high taxes and over-regulation explain America’s high unemployment.
It is also filled with propaganda. A quotation by President John F. Kennedy states that high tax rates can strangle the economy, but Kennedy’s was speaking a half-century ago, when the top marginal tax rates were twice what they are today.
Most of all, the Republican platform is devoid of compassion. 
America today presents the paradox of a rich country falling apart because of the collapse of its core values.
American productivity is among the highest in the world.
Average national income per person is about $46,000 – enough not only to live on, but to prosper.
Yet the country is in the throes of an ugly moral crisis.
Income inequality is at historic highs, but the rich claim that they have no responsibility to the rest of society.
They refuse to come to the aid of the destitute, and defend tax cuts at every opportunity.
Almost everybody complains, almost everybody aggressively defends their own narrow and short-term interests, and almost everybody abandons any pretense of looking ahead or addressing the needs of others.
What passes for American political debate is a contest between the parties to give bigger promises to the middle class, mainly in the form of budget-busting tax cuts at a time when the fiscal deficit is already more than 10% of GDP.
Americans seem to believe that they have a natural right to government services without paying taxes.
In the American political lexicon, taxes are defined as a denial of liberty.
There was a time, not long ago, when Americans talked of ending poverty at home and abroad.
Lyndon Johnson’s War on Poverty in the mid-1960’s reflected an era of national optimism and the belief that society should make collective efforts to solve common problems, such as poverty, pollution, and health care. America in the 1960’s enacted programs to rebuild poor communities, to fight air and water pollution, and to ensure health care for the elderly.
Then the deep divisions over Vietnam and civil rights, combined with a surge of consumerism and advertising, seemed to end an era of shared sacrifice for the common good.
For 40 years, compassion in politics receded.
Ronald Reagan gained popularity by cutting social benefits for the poor (claiming that the poor cheated to receive extra payments).
Bill Clinton continued those cuts in the 1990’s.
Today, no politician even dares to mention help for poor people.
The big campaign contributors to both parties pay to ensure that their vested interests dominate political debates.
That means that both parties increasingly defend the interests of the rich, though Republicans do so slightly more than Democrats.
Even a modest tax increase on the rich is unlikely to find support in American politics.
The result of all of this is likely to be a long-term decline of US power and prosperity, because Americans no longer invest collectively in their common future.
America will remain a rich society for a long time to come, but one that is increasingly divided and unstable.
Fear and propaganda may lead to more US-led international wars, as in the past decade.
And what is happening in America is likely to be repeated elsewhere.
America is vulnerable to social breakdown because it is a highly diverse society.
Racism and anti-immigrant sentiments are an important part of the attack on the poor, or at least the reason why so many are willing to heed the propaganda against helping the poor.
As other societies grapple with their own increasing diversity, they may follow the US into crisis.
Swedes recently gave enough votes to a right-wing, anti-immigrant party to give it representation in parliament, reflecting a growing backlash against the rising number of immigrants in Swedish society.
In France, Nicolas Sarkozy’s government has tried to regain popularity with the working class by deporting Roma migrants, a target of widespread hatred and ethnic attacks.
Both examples show that Europe, like the US, is vulnerable to the politics of division, as our societies become more ethnically diverse.
The lesson from America is that economic growth is no guarantee of wellbeing or political stability.
American society has become increasingly harsh, where the richest Americans buy their way to political power, and the poor are abandoned to their fate.
In their private lives, Americans have become addicted to consumerism, which drains their time, savings, attention, and inclination to engage in acts of collective compassion.
The world should beware.
Unless we break the ugly trends of big money in politics and rampant consumerism, we risk winning economic productivity at the price of our humanity.
America’s Economic Stalemate
CAMBRIDGE – The United States appears trapped in a dangerous economic stalemate.&#160; The refusal by both Republicans and Democrats to give ground on the budget is preventing the government from dealing with its massive fiscal deficit and rapidly rising national debt.
Indeed, the Congressional Budget Office projects that the national debt could increase to 82% of GDP over the next ten years – more than double the debt ratio as recently as 2008.
That forecast, moreover, is based on quite optimistic assumptions of strong economic growth and low interest rates.
With slower growth and more normal interest rates, the debt ratio could easily rise to more than 100% in 2021, and exceed 150% by 2030.
A major reason for the accelerating growth in government debt is America’s rapidly aging population and the resulting increase in the cost of the universal pension and health-care programs – Social Security and Medicare.
Most experts believe that limiting the rise in debt will require slowing the growth of these “entitlement” programs and increasing taxes as a share of GDP.
But President Barack Obama and the congressional Democrats oppose any reduction in future entitlement programs, while the Republican presidential candidates and their party’s congressional delegation oppose any increase in tax revenues.
The result is the current stalemate in reducing the fiscal deficit and reversing the growth of the national debt.
Republicans argue that the national debt’s growth should be limited only by cutting government spending.
Although some cuts in traditional outlays should be part of efforts to rein in spending, this approach should be supplemented by reducing “tax expenditures” – the special features of the tax code that subsidize health care, mortgage borrowing, local-government taxes, etc..
Limiting tax expenditures could reduce the annual deficit by as much as 2% of GDP, thereby reducing the debt-to-GDP ratio in 2021 by more than 25 percentage points.
Republicans generally reject this form of spending reduction, because it results in additional tax revenue.
While this method does indeed increase total revenue, the economic effect of limiting tax expenditures is the same as it is under any other method of cutting spending on those programs.
But the Republicans’ opposition to anything that raises revenue means that this key to breaking the budget stalemate won’t be implemented.
The budget cost of Social Security pensions could be gradually reduced by substituting annuities generated by investment-based personal retirement accounts for part of the current tax-financed benefits.
But even though such a reform could maintain income levels for retirees, Democrats oppose it, because it lowers traditional government benefits.
This reinforces the stalemate.
The two parties’ hardline stances anticipate the upcoming congressional and presidential elections in November 2012.
The Republicans, in effect, face the voters with a sign that says, “We won’t raise your taxes, but the Democrats will.”
The Democrats’ sign, by contrast, says, “We won’t reduce your pension or health benefits, but the Republicans will.”
Neither side wants any ambiguity in their message before the election, thus ruling out the possibility of any immediate changes in tax expenditures or future Social Security pensions.
But, for the same reason, I am optimistic that the stalemate will end after the election.
At that point, both Republicans and Democrats will be able to accept reforms that they must reject now.
Another post-election route to deficit reduction would be to lower marginal tax rates and balance that revenue loss with cuts in tax expenditures.
Official analyses downplay the effect of lower marginal tax rates on taxable income, but experience shows that taxable income rises substantially as taxpayers respond to lower marginal rates by working more, taking more of their compensation in taxable cash than in fringe benefits, and reducing their tax-deductible consumption.
Reducing tax expenditures while lowering marginal tax rates can produce substantial revenue by increasing the level of taxable income.&#160;
The current economic stalemate is troubling, because financial markets could react adversely, and because delays in addressing the fiscal deficit means a higher national debt.
I may be too optimistic, but I think there is good reason to believe that the current budget stalemate reflects election posturing, and that the US political system will prove more effective at making progress on fiscal consolidation once the election is past.
America’s Election and the Global Economy
STANFORD – As America’s elections approach, with President Barack Obama slightly in front of his Republican challenger, former Massachusetts Governor Mitt Romney, pollsters still rate the races for control of the presidency and the United States Senate too close to call, with the House of Representatives likely to remain in Republican hands.
The differences between the candidates are considerable, and highly consequential for American economic policy and the global economy, although enactment of their programs will depend on the makeup of Congress.
The most important differences between the two candidates can be summarized as follows:
Spending.
Democrats oppose most nondefense spending cuts, arguing that reductions would cause the economy to contract.
That case is strongest if the spending reductions are large and abrupt in a weak economy.
If phased in over a multi-year period as the economy recovers, as Romney proposes, thrift would likely be expansionary.
For example, federal spending relative to GDP fell by five percentage points from the mid-1980’s to the late 1990’s in the US, and by an even larger margin in recent decades in Canada – that is, through periods of strong economic growth.
Taxes.
Obama would raise the top marginal tax rates on wages, capital gains, dividends, interest, and estates, especially on higher-income individuals and small businesses.
Yet he has never proposed comprehensive reform of either the personal or corporate income tax.
By contrast, Romney would reduce America’s corporate tax rate (the highest in the OECD) to 25% and tax American multinationals on a territorial, rather than a worldwide, basis in order to increase their tax competitiveness.
He would also lower personal tax rates by 20%, and make up lost revenue by limiting tax deductions and credits, particularly at the upper end, thereby raising about 18.5% of GDP, just above the historical average, at full employment. Romney’s fiscal plan thus reduces deficits sufficiently to decrease the debt-to-GDP ratio.
He favors a balanced-budget amendment to the Constitution, and hopes to balance the budget over eight years.
Obama, by contrast, would run larger deficits – his spending increase is much larger than his tax increase – which imply large tax hikes in the future.
Moreover, he would run far larger debt ratios than Romney, because the main driver of the debt is entitlement spending.
Entitlements.
Obama has remained silent about reform of Medicare and Social Security, whose long-run deficits are several times the national debt.
Vice President Joe Biden has even said that “no changes” to Social Security are to be made.
Romney supports gradually increasing retirement ages, a premium-support model for Medicare, and shifting Medicaid (health insurance for the poor) to the states via block grants.
The Obama campaign is pummeling Romney on Medicare, and the Romney campaign is hammering Obama for his refusal to negotiate or even propose a solution.
The Obama policy would thus lead to ever-higher deficits and debt ratios well over 100% of GDP, a level that numerous studies imply would reduce US economic growth by one-third or more and might induce a sovereign-debt crisis.
Some observers suggest that Obama’s unspoken plan is ever-growing entitlements eventually paid for by a European-style value-added tax.
Trade.
Obama is the first US president in a long time who has not played a leading role on global trade liberalization.
The Doha Round of global trade talks remains stalled, and Obama delayed the three bilateral free-trade agreements that awaited approval when he came into office.
Romney is a proponent of free trade, but has said that he would be tougher on China’s trade practices and currency policies.
Regulation.
Obama wants to expand federal command-and-control regulation further (though the courts have stopped his extension of some regulatory powers).
Romney vows an economically balanced approach that would reform Obama’s major health-care, environmental, and financial-services regulations.
Appointments.
Every US president appoints thousands of officials, many with considerable power.
Romney has said that he would not reappoint Ben Bernanke as Fed Chairman (likely candidates: economists Glenn Hubbard, Greg Mankiw, John Taylor, and Martin Feldstein).
Other presidential appointees exert considerable influence on firms, industries, or the entire economy.
For example, Obama’s appointees to the obscure National Labor Relations Board tried to prevent Boeing from expanding in South Carolina, despite the state’s anti-union “right to work” legislation.
These policies would affect US economic growth, the budget deficit, national saving, and hence global trade and capital flows.
With larger deficits under Obama than under Romney, America would need more capital from Europe, Latin America, and Asia, while higher taxes and debt would impede US growth and thus undermine these regions’ exports.
Obama would steer America in the direction of European social-welfare states; Romney’s agenda is designed to prevent that.
Whoever wins, a fiscal cliff looms at the end of 2012.
Previous legislation, if not reversed, will lead to large abrupt tax hikes and spending cuts, which the Congressional Budget Office forecasts would likely cause a recession in 2013.
While a post-election, lame-duck session of Congress will address the fiscal cliff, the deep differences between Republicans and Democrats on taxes and spending remain wide and difficult to bridge.
With uncertainty plaguing Europe’s finances and China slowing, the last thing the global economy needs is a stagnant or shrinking US economy.
But it will take strong leadership by the president-elect to avoid it.
America’s Exceptional Fiscal Conservatism
WASHINGTON, DC – In most countries, to be “fiscally conservative” means to worry a great deal about the budget deficit and debt levels – and to push these issues to the top of the policy agenda.
In many eurozone countries today, “fiscal conservatives” are a powerful group, insisting on the need to boost government revenue while bringing spending under control.
In Great Britain, too, leading Conservatives have recently proved willing to raise taxes and attempted to limit future spending.
The United States is very different in this respect.
There, leading politicians who choose to call themselves “fiscal conservatives” – such as Paul Ryan, now the Republican Party’s presumptive vice-presidential nominee to run alongside presidential candidate Mitt Romney in November’s election – care more about cutting taxes, regardless of the effect on the federal deficit and total outstanding debt.
Why do US fiscal conservatives care so little about government debt, relative to their counterparts in other countries?
It has not always been this way.
For example, in 1960, President Dwight D. Eisenhower’s advisers suggested that he should cut taxes in order to pave the way for his vice president, Richard Nixon, to be elected to the presidency.
Eisenhower declined, partly because he did not particularly like or trust Nixon, but mostly because he thought it was important to hand over a more nearly balanced budget to his successor.
The framework for US macroeconomic policy changed dramatically when the international monetary system broke down in 1971.
The US could no longer maintain a fixed exchange rate between the dollar and gold – the cornerstone of the postwar Bretton Woods system.
The arrangement collapsed because the US did not want to tighten monetary policy and run more restrictive fiscal policy: keeping US voters happy was understandably more important to President Nixon than maintaining a global system of fixed exchange rates.
Ironically, however, rather than undermining the predominant international role of the US dollar, the end of Bretton Woods actually boosted its use around the world.
Much has been written, and many hands wrung, about the dollar’s decline over the last four decades, but the fact remains that holdings of US dollar assets by foreigners today are vastly greater than they were in 1971.
This turns out to be a mixed blessing, because it has allowed the US to become less careful about its fiscal accounts.
Foreigners now hold roughly half of all US federal government debt, and they are willing to hold it when it yields a very low return in dollars (and even when the dollar depreciates).
In fact, whenever the world looks unstable, investors want to hold more dollar assets – even when the US is the cause of the instability.
When big US banks are in trouble or Americans are having another debilitating political fight over their public finances, global investors scramble into US Treasuries.
Last year’s congressional showdown over the federal debt ceiling may have cost the US its AAA sovereign rating with Standard &amp; Poor’s, but the federal government’s borrowing costs are actually lower now than they were then.
What has America done with this opportunity – arguably the lowest-cost funding in the history of humankind?
Not much, in terms of productive investment, strengthening education, or maintaining essential infrastructure.
But the US has done a great deal in terms of adopting tax cuts that boost consumption relative to income and lower government revenue relative to expenditure.
This is the lasting legacy of the “temporary” tax cuts adopted by George W. Bush’s administration in the early 2000’s.
And Americans have shifted greatly toward political philosophies – on the right and on the left – that regard public debt merely as a distraction. Or, as former vice president Dick Cheney put it, “Reagan taught us that deficits do not matter” – meaning that Ronald Reagan cut taxes, ran bigger deficits, and did not suffer any adverse political consequences.
Ryan and members of the Tea Party wing of the Republican Party undoubtedly want to cut the size of the federal government, and they have articulated plans to do this over several decades.
But, in the near term, what they promise is primarily tax cuts: their entire practical program is front-loaded in that direction.
The calculation is that this will prove politically popular (probably true) while making it easier to implement spending cuts down the road (less obvious).
The vulnerability caused by higher public debt over the next few decades is simply ignored.
For example, Ryan supported George W. Bush’s spending spree.
He also supports maintaining defense spending at or near its current level – resisting the cuts that were put in place under the Budget Control Act of 2011.
The assumption here – unstated and highly questionable – is that the US will be able to sell an unlimited amount of government debt at low interest rates for the foreseeable future.
There is no other country in the world where fiscal conservatives would want to be associated with such a high-stakes gamble.
America’s Failed Militarized Foreign Policy
Many of today’s war zones – including Afghanistan, Ethiopia, Iran, Iraq, Pakistan, Somalia, and Sudan – share basic problems that lie at the root of their conflicts.
They are all poor, buffeted by natural disasters – especially floods, droughts, and earthquakes – and have rapidly growing populations that are pressing on the capacity of the land to feed them.
And the proportion of youth is very high, with a bulging population of young men of military age (15-24 years).
All of these problems can be solved only through long-term sustainable economic development.
Yet the United States persists in responding to symptoms rather than to underlying conditions by trying to address every conflict by military means.
It backs the Ethiopian army in Somalia.
It occupies Iraq and Afghanistan.
It threatens to bomb Iran.
It supports the military dictatorship in Pakistan.
None of these military actions addresses the problems that led to conflict in the first place.
On the contrary, American policies typically inflame the situation rather than solve it.
Time and again, this military approach comes back to haunt the US.
The US embraced the Shah of Iran by sending massive armaments, which fell into the hands of Iran’s Revolutionary Government after 1979.
The US then backed Saddam Hussein in his attack on Iran, until the US ended up attacking Saddam himself.
The US backed Osama bin Laden in Afghanistan against the Soviets, until the US ended up fighting bin Laden.
Since 2001 the US has supported Pervez Musharraf in Pakistan with more than $10 billion in aid, and now faces an unstable regime that just barely survives.
US foreign policy is so ineffective because it has been taken over by the military.
Even postwar reconstruction in Iraq under the US-led occupation was run by the Pentagon rather than by civilian agencies.
The US military budget dominates everything about foreign policy.
Adding up the budgets of the Pentagon, the Iraq and Afghanistan wars, the Department of Homeland Security, nuclear weapons programs, and the State Department’s military assistance operations, the US will spend around $800 billion this year on security, compared with less than $20 billion for economic development.
In a stunning article on aid to Pakistan during the Bush administration, Craig Cohen and Derek Chollet demonstrated the disastrous nature of this militarized approach – even before the tottering Musharraf regime’s latest crackdown.
They show that even though Pakistan faces huge problems of poverty, population, and environment, 75% of the $10 billion in US aid has gone to the Pakistani military, ostensibly to reimburse Pakistan for its contribution to the “war on terror,” and to help it buy F-16s and other weapons systems.
Another 16% went straight to the Pakistani budget, no questions asked.
That left less than 10% for development and humanitarian assistance.
Annual US aid for education in Pakistan has amounted to just $64 million, or $1.16 per school-aged child.
The authors note that “the strategic direction for Pakistan was set early by a narrow circle at the top of the Bush administration and has been largely focused on the war effort rather than on Pakistan’s internal situation.”
They also emphasize that “US engagement with Pakistan is highly militarized and centralized, with very little reaching the vast majority of Pakistanis.”
They quote George Bush as saying, “When [Musharraf] looks me in the eye and says…there won’t be a Taliban and won’t be al-Qaeda, I believe him, you know?”
This militarized approach is leading the world into a downward spiral of violence and conflict.
Each new US weapons system “sold” or given to the region increases the chances of expanded war and further military coups, and to the chance that the arms will be turned on the US itself.
None of it helps to address the underlying problems of poverty, child mortality, water scarcity, and lack of livelihoods in places like Pakistan’s Northwest Frontier Province, Sudan’s Darfur region, or Somalia.
These places are bulging with people facing a tightening squeeze of insufficient rainfall and degraded pasturelands.
Naturally, many join radical causes.
The Bush administration fails to recognize these fundamental demographic and environmental challenges, that $800 billion of security spending won’t bring irrigation to Afghanistan, Pakistan, Sudan, and Somalia, and therefore won’t bring peace.
Instead of seeing real people in crisis, they see caricatures, a terrorist around every corner.
A more peaceful world will be possible only when Americans and others begin to see things through the eyes of their supposed enemies, and realize that today’s conflicts, having resulted from desperation and despair, can be solved through economic development rather than war.
We will have peace when we heed the words of President John F. Kennedy, who said, a few months before his death, “For, in the final analysis, our most basic common link is that we all inhabit this small planet.
We all breathe the same air.
We all cherish our children’s future.
And we are all mortal.”
America’s Financial Leviathan
BERKELEY – In 1950, finance and insurance in the United States accounted for 2.8% of GDP, according to US Department of Commerce estimates.
By 1960, that share had grown to 3.8% of GDP, and reached 6% of GDP in 1990.
Today, it is 8.4% of GDP, and it is not shrinking.
The Wall Street Journal’s Justin Lahart reports that the 2010 share was higher than the previous peak share in 2006.
Lahart goes on to say that growth in the finance-and-insurance share of the economy has “not, by and large, been a bad thing....Deploying capital to the places where it can be best used helps the economy grow...”
But if the US were getting good value from the extra 5.6% of GDP that it is now spending on finance and insurance – the extra $750 billion diverted annually from paying people who make directly useful goods and provide directly useful services – it would be obvious in the statistics.
At a typical 5% annual real interest rate for risky cash flows, diverting that large a share of resources away from goods and services directly useful this year is a good bargain only if it boosts overall annual economic growth by 0.3% – or 6% per 25-year generation.
There have been many shocks to the US economy over the past couple of generations, and many factors have added to or subtracted from economic growth.
But it is not obvious that the US economy today would be 6% less productive if it had had the finance-insurance system of 1950 rather than the one that prevailed during the past 20 years.
There are five ways that an economy gains from a well-functioning finance-insurance system.
First, people are no longer as vulnerable to the effects of fires, floods, medical disasters, unemployment, business collapses, sectoral shifts, and so forth, because a well-working finance-insurance system diversifies and thus dissipates some risks, and deals with others by matching those who fear risk with those who can comfortably bear it.
While it might be true that America’s current finance-insurance system better distributes risk in some sense, it is hard to see how that could be the case, given the experience of investors in equities and housing over the past two decades.
Second, well-functioning financial systems match large, illiquid investment projects with the relatively small pools of money contributed by individual savers who value liquidity highly.
There has been one important innovation over the past two generations: businesses can now issue high-yield bonds.
But, given the costs of the bankruptcy process, it has never been clear why a business would rather issue high-yield bonds (besides gaming the tax system), or why investors would rather buy them than take an equity stake.
Third, improved opportunities to borrow allow one to spend more now, when one is poor, and save more later, when one is rich.
Households are certainly much more able to borrow, thanks to home-equity loans, credit-card balances, and payday loans.
But what are they really buying?
Many are not buying the ability to spend when they are poor and save when they are rich, but instead appear to be buying postponement of the “unpleasant financial retrenchment” talk with the other members of their household.
And that is not something you want to buy.
Fourth, we have seen major improvements in the ease of transactions.
But, while electronic transactions have made a great deal of financial life much easier, this should have been accompanied by a decrease, not an increase, in the finance share of GDP, just as automated switching in telecommunications led to a decrease in the number of telephone switchboard operators per phone call.
Indeed, the operations of those parts of the financial system most closely related to technological improvements have slimmed down markedly: consider what has happened to the checking operations of the regional Federal Reserve Banks.
Finally, better finance should mean better corporate governance.
Since shareholder democracy does not provide effective control over entrenched, runaway, self-indulgent management, finance has a potentially powerful role to play in ensuring that corporate managers work in the interest of shareholders.
And a substantial change has indeed occurred over the past two generations: CEOs focus much more attention than they used to on pleasing the stock market, and this is likely to be a good thing.
Overall, however, it remains disturbing that we do not see the obvious large benefits, at either the micro or macro level, in the US economy’s efficiency that would justify spending an extra 5.6% of GDP every year on finance and insurance.
Lahart cites the conclusion of New York University’s Thomas Philippon that today’s US financial sector is outsized by two percentage points of GDP.
And it is very possible that Philippon’s estimate of the size of the US financial sector’s hypertrophy is too small.
Why has the devotion of a great deal of skill and enterprise to finance and insurance sector not paid obvious economic dividends?
There are two sustainable ways to make money in finance: find people with risks that need to be carried and match them with people with unused risk-bearing capacity, or find people with such risks and match them with people who are clueless but who have money.
Are we sure that most of the growth in finance stems from a rising share of financial professionals who undertake the former rather than the latter?
America’s Fiscal Isolationism
DENVER – Patience might be a virtue, but not necessarily when it comes to American foreign policy.
Consider “the long war,” a bold concept embraced a few years ago to describe the continuing struggle against terrorism, the grudging progress that could realistically be achieved, and the enormous financial burden that it would impose for years to come.
It was also a realpolitik acknowledgement of the setbacks to be expected along the way (the “slog,” as then Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld put it).
Above all, the term was an effort to communicate to Americans, accustomed to waging war with speed and decisiveness (and insistent on it since Vietnam), the long-term sacrifice and commitment needed to win a war of survival.
Its proponents also understood that the war would not be limited to weapons, but would need to be a sustained effort, involving, as they put it, the “whole of government,” with civilian agencies marshaled behind military – or paramilitary – objectives.
Daunting as the effort would be, its advocates assumed a sustainable political consensus to support it.
After all, the United States had been attacked.
Today, that consensus is unraveling as America’s politicians wrestle with a federal budget that is itself turning into a long war – one with its own casualties.
The battle lines in this struggle suggest that there is little accord among political elites for any spending, let alone for a long war with far-flung commitments.
As a result, basic assumptions are being questioned at every turn.
Indeed, the current budget war seems to be reopening old divisions about America’s view of itself and the world.
The outcome is far from certain, but even isolationism, a perennial American malady, seems to be making a comeback.
Isolationism is a familiar refrain in US foreign policy among those elements of the right that consider the US too good for the world, as well as among those on the left who consider America a destructive global force.
But this time, as perhaps never before, a bipartisan isolationist impulse is being driven by the budget.
America’s fiscal crisis is profound, and it is not just about numbers.
As the emotions in Washington today suggest, the aversion to tax increases runs far deeper than concern about their effect on current economic performance and job growth.
In part, it represents a fundamental – some would say fundamentalist – view that taxes are to government what a bottle of whisky is to an alcoholic.
Government, as Ronald Reagan told us, is the problem, not the solution.
That message is bad news for American diplomacy.
The linkage between politicians’ unwillingness to fund domestic programs and the imperiled commitment to “the long war” might elude those in US foreign-policy circles, but it is not lost on the rest of the country.
Opinion surveys suggest that Americans want to maintain many of the “discretionary” domestic programs – schools, hospitals, transportation infrastructure, recreational parks, etc. – that are now on the chopping block in budget negotiations.
In places like rural El Paso County, on the eastern plains of Colorado, far from the federal budget debate’s epicenter, spending cuts are the order of the day.
School districts are increasing class sizes as they shed teachers, as well as deferring maintenance projects and curtailing the school-bus service.
These cuts are having a very real and immediate impact on El Paso County’s residents.
Can they, and other Americans who are losing vital services, really be expected to rise above it all and support funding to build new schools in Afghanistan?
Not only are America’s public schools starting to look second-rate, but so is its infrastructure, which had long been a source of national pride.
How many travelers nowadays can fail to note the difference between Asia’s new, efficient airports and the aging, clogged antiques in some major US cities?
The budget war is not producing any consensus on fixing America’s infrastructure, but it is beginning to produce a view that Afghanistan and Pakistan are far from being core US national interests.
Why, people ask, are schools and roads in Afghanistan and Iraq more important than those in Colorado or California?
At one point in 2008, the US military picked up the cost of transporting a tiger for the Baghdad zoo.
When was the last time the US government did that for a US zoo (outside of Washington, of course)?
How this debate sorts itself out will have profound consequences for how America conducts itself in the world.
But it might also take a toll on how the world reacts to America’s fastest-growing export: unsolicited advice.
Countries take others’ advice for many reasons.
Sometimes they respect the adviser’s wisdom and insights (fairly rare in diplomacy).
Or they might fear the consequences of not taking the advice (an offer one cannot refuse, so to speak).
Or, as is true of many of America’s diplomatic transactions, accepting advice could open the way to a better relationship and to additional assistance.
In short, diplomacy – and US diplomacy, in particular – often involves money.
But what if there is no money to offer?
What if Americans, tired of the budget cuts in their neighborhoods, refuse to support funds even for “the long war”?
At that point, senior US officials might well arrive in a country, offer advice, and find that nobody is bothering to listen.
Obama’s Underachieving Foreign Policy
PARIS – To evaluate an American president’s foreign-policy performance after one term is challenging, given the complex diplomatic and strategic environment and significant domestic constraints that confront every US president.
Nevertheless, in advance of November’s presidential election, it is important to distinguish the forces that have shaped Barack Obama’s foreign policy, and to assess his handling of them.
Obama kept his promise to withdraw American forces from Iraq during his first term.
But the move proved to be a strategic defeat, given that it significantly diminished the United States’ political influence in Iraq.
Indeed, Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki’s government is becoming increasingly allied with Iran.
Obama, who opposed the Iraq war, should not be blamed for current circumstances there.
But he was unable to improve the situation or help Iraq’s Shias and Sunnis reach a political compromise.
In contrast, Obama expanded the war in Afghanistan – which he considered to be a war of necessity – and put the Taliban on the defensive.
But the US will begin to withdraw troops after 2014, without having defined a political solution in line with its interests.
Meanwhile, America’s strategic partnership with Pakistan, where Obama won a significant symbolic victory by eliminating Osama bin Laden, is in tatters.
US-Pakistan relations have regressed to their level before September 11, 2001, with mutual distrust minimizing cooperation.
In fact, in all of the strategic challenges to US security that Obama inherited – Iran, North Korea, Iraq, Afghanistan, Pakistan, and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict – he has made virtually no significant political gains.
Notwithstanding Obama’s skillful response to the Arab Spring – the only strategic surprise that he has faced as president – his credibility in the Muslim world has steadily declined.
He has failed to deliver on the key promise of his Cairo speech in 2009: “to seek a new beginning between the United States and Muslims around the world.”
Moreover, Obama’s efforts to improve relations with Russia – embodied in the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START) – did not lead to a genuine “reset” in bilateral ties, largely because an increasingly Soviet-style Russian leadership distrusts a US establishment that still regards Russia as a foe.
And the US-China relationship has deteriorated, with America seeking to manage China’s rise strategically – for example, through regional trade agreements and an enhanced military presence in Asia.
On multilateral issues, Obama’s performance is equally unimpressive.
After committing to a 17% reduction of greenhouse-gas emissions by 2020 – and despite his declaration that he would not tolerate inaction in this area – he simply stopped raising the issue after the Republicans’ sweeping victory in the November 2010 mid-term elections.
Likewise, domestic pressure has caused Obama to neglect trade issues.
The US is largely responsible for the failure of the Doha Round of global trade talks.
Obama’s one significant foreign-policy breakthrough has been to release the US from the grip of the “global war on terror.”
Jettisoning the Manichean rhetoric of that “war” allowed the US to regain the political legitimacy that former President George W. Bush had lost, without diminishing its strategic credibility.
After the Vietnam War, Jimmy Carter hoped to make a break with established US policy.
But his administration’s actions – including serious blunders in Iran and Afghanistan – made the US appear weak and indecisive.
While Obama’s policies have not weakened America’s international standing, they also have not led to achievements comparable to Richard Nixon’s rapprochement with China, largely owing to what might be described as the dogmatic pragmatism that underlies them – an emphasis on avoiding the worst, rather than on striving for the best.
Moreover, Obama has been confronted with significant constraints, including the global economic crisis, domestic political polarization, a hostile Congress, and the rise of emerging powers that need the US but are unwilling to accept its dominance.
As a result, he has failed to change strategic realities by, for example, reconciling America’s broader interests with those of Iran (a declared enemy), Pakistan (a “frenemy”), and Israel (a key ally).
To be sure, Obama faces a more complex diplomatic and strategic environment than Nixon faced in the 1970’s.
Unstable coalitions in Iran prevent any substantive negotiations between the two countries, while political fragmentation in Pakistan significantly hinders US policy there.
And the fragility of Israel’s ruling coalition, combined with strong congressional support for Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu, makes it difficult to influence the country’s policies, despite Israel’s significant impact on US strategy in the Arab world.
But Obama has also struggled to define the terms of a possible grand bargain.
Any agreement with Iran would require consent from Israel and the Gulf countries, which do not share the same objectives.
And the US cannot reach an accord with Pakistan without India’s consent, which America would be unable to force, especially given that it relies on India to counterbalance China’s growing clout in Asia.
With Israel, the terms are ostensibly simpler: in exchange for a stronger US security guarantee, Israel would accept the establishment of a Palestinian state based on the 1967 borders.
But Israel is also a crucial domestic political topic in the US; indeed, any distancing from Israel is unacceptable to most Americans.
While Obama’s first term could not be called a foreign-policy disappointment, his achievements – although not trivial – have been limited.
If he wins a second term, he is likely to find it increasingly difficult to win by playing not to lose.
America’s Groucho Marxists
LONDON – Groucho Marx has always been my favorite Marxist.
One of his jokes goes to the heart of the failure of the ideology – the dogmatic religion – inflicted on our poor world by his namesake, Karl.
“Who are you going to believe,” Groucho once asked, “me, or your own eyes?”
For hundreds of millions of citizens in Communist-run countries in the twentieth century, the “me” in the question was a dictator or oligarchy ruling with totalitarian or authoritarian powers.
It didn’t matter what you could see with your own eyes. You had to accept what you were told the world was like.
Reality was whatever the ruling party said it was.
The designated successor to Mao Zedong in China, Hua Guofeng, raised this attitude to an art form. He was known as a “whateverist.”
The Party and people should faithfully follow whatever Mao instructed them to do.
Groucho posed two insuperable problems for the “whateverists” of communism. First, your own eyes and your reason would surely tell you before long that the communist idyll – the withering away of the state and the triumph over need – would never come.
Communism, like the horizon, was always just beyond reach.
It would be interesting to know how many of those at Beijing’s Central Party School – the party’s main educational institute – believe that the Chinese state is about to wither away, or ever will.
The second application of Groucho’s question was that citizens of most Communist countries soon learned that the loss of freedom that they suffered was not compensated by greater prosperity or a higher quality of life.
The more that Russians, Poles, Czechs, and others saw of the life-style in the Western democracies, the more they questioned their own system. In his magisterial book
So, in the political sphere, reason has trumped both faith in an unattainable goal and self-delusion about the consequences of its pursuit.
Authoritarian party-states, such as China and Vietnam, survive, but not through commitment to communism. Their legitimacy depends on their ability to deliver economic growth through state-managed capitalism.
Democracies, of course, allow people to use their reason to make choices based on the evidence of their own eyes.
When you don’t like a government, you can turn the rascals out without overthrowing the whole system.
Change can be made in an evolutionary, rather than a revolutionary, way.
But no one should think that debate in democracies is always based on reason, or that democracy necessarily makes people more rational.
Sometimes reason does prevail.
This is what appeared to happen in the last Indian election, and the election in the United States of President Barack Obama was also plainly a supremely rational moment.
But reason does not seem to be getting much of a hearing during the current health-care debate in the US.
Outsiders, even admirers, have often wondered how the most globalized country in the world – a continent inhabited by people from every land – can be so irrationally insular on some issues.
We scratch our heads about America’s gun laws. We were astonished during President George W. Bush’s first term at the administration’s hostility to science, reflected in its stance on climate change and Charles Darwin’s theory of evolution.
The opposition to health-care reform is a similar cause of bemusement.
We know that despite its great wealth – and its groundbreaking medical research – America’s health-care system is awful. It is hugely expensive.
Its costs overwhelm workplace health-insurance schemes. The poor go unprotected.
Too many of the sick are untreated. Overall health statistics are worse than those in comparable countries.
Yet Obama’s attempts to reform health care have run into hysterical opposition.
His proposals would lead, it is said, to the state murdering the elderly.
They would introduce Soviet communism into the US – just like what apparently exists in Canada and Britain, with their state-sponsored health systems.
Communism in Toronto and London?
Or just better, cheaper, more reliable health care for all?
Reason seems to be having a hard time of it in the US just now.
Maybe it’s no coincidence that Groucho Marx was an American citizen.
But surely the way a society cares for its sick and needy and elderly is sufficiently important to deserve serious and thoughtful argument based on what we really can see with our own eyes rather than on uninformed partisan prejudice.
Gun Control After Newtown
NEW YORK – The brutal murder of 20 children and seven adults in Newtown, Connecticut, shakes us to the core as individuals and requires a response as citizens.
The United States seems to reel from one mass gun killing to another – roughly one a month this year alone.
Easy access to guns in the US leads to horrific murder rates relative to other highly educated and wealthy societies.
America needs to find a better way.
Other countries have done so.
Between the mid-1970’s and the mid-1990’s, Australia had several mass shootings.
After a particularly horrible massacre in 1996, a new prime minister, John Howard, declared that enough was enough.
He instituted a severe crackdown on gun ownership, and forced would-be gun owners to submit to a rigorous application process, and to document why they would need a gun.
Conditions for gun ownership in Australia are now very strict, and the registration and approval process can take a year or more.
Howard’s government also implemented a rigorous “buyback” policy, to enable the government to purchase guns already owned by the public.
The policy worked.
While violent crime has not ended in Australia, murders are down, and, even more dramatically, there has not been a single mass shooting since 1996 in which three or more people died (the definition used in many studies of mass shootings).
Before the crackdown, there had been 13 such massacres in 18 years.
Yet the US still refuses to act, even after this year’s string of shocking incidents: the massacre in a movie theatre in Colorado, an attack on a Sikh community in Milwaukee, another on a shopping mall in Oregon, and many more before the ruthless slaughter of first graders and school staff in Newtown.
The gun lobby in the US remains powerful, and politicians are afraid to counter it.
Given the shooting of then-Congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords in 2011, perhaps they even fear that they, too, might be targeted.
There can be little doubt that some societies are more steeped in violence than others, even controlling for obvious factors like income levels and education.
The US homicide rate is roughly four times that of comparable societies in Western Europe, and Latin America’s homicide rates are even higher than in the US (and dramatically higher than Asian countries at roughly the same income level).
What accounts for staggeringly high rates in the US and Latin America?
American violence is rooted in history.
The US and Latin American countries are all “conquest” societies, in which Europeans ruled over multi-racial societies.
In many of these countries, including the US, the European conquerors and their descendants nearly wiped out the indigenous populations, partly through disease, but also through war, starvation, death marches, and forced labor.
In the US and many Latin American countries, slaveholding fueled mass violence as well.
The slaves – and generations of their descendants – were routinely murdered.
The US also developed a particular populist belief that gun ownership constitutes a vital protection against government tyranny.
The US was born in a citizens’ revolt against British imperial power.
The right of citizens to organize militias to fight government tyranny was therefore a founding idea of the new country, enshrined in the Second Amendment to the US Constitution, which declares that, because a country needs a well-regulated militia, the people have the right to bear arms.
Since citizens’ militias are anachronistic, gun owners now use the second amendment merely to defend individual gun ownership, as if that somehow offers protection against tyranny.
A reckless, right-wing Supreme Court has agreed with them.
As a result, gun ownership has become perversely linked to freedom in the vast gun-owning American sub-culture.
But, instead of protection of freedom, Americans nowadays are getting massive bloodshed and fear.
The claim that gun ownership ensures freedom is especially absurd, given that most of the world’s vibrant democracies have long since cracked down on private gun ownership.
No tyrant has risen in Australia since Howard’s gun-control reforms.
Simply put, freedom in the twenty-first century does not depend on unregulated gun ownership.
Indeed, America’s gun culture is a threat to freedom, after the murder of a president, senator, and other public leaders, and countless assassination attempts against public officials over recent decades.
Yet US gun culture remains as pervasive as it is unrecorded.
America reels from one shooting disaster to the next, and on nearly every occasion, politicians dutifully declare their continued devotion to unregulated gun ownership.
Indeed, no one even knows how many guns Americans hold.
The number is estimated to be around 270 million, or almost one per person on average.
According to one recent poll, 47% of households have a gun at home.
The shooting in Newtown was not only especially horrific and heartbreaking, but is also part of an increasingly common pattern – a specific kind of murder-suicide that has been carefully studied by psychologists and psychiatrists.
Loners, often with paranoid tendencies, commit these heinous acts as part of their own suicide.
They use carefully planned and staged mass murders of innocents in order to take revenge on society and to glorify themselves as they take their own lives.
The perpetrators are not hardened criminals; many have no previous criminal record.
They are pathetic, deranged, and often have struggled with mental instability for much of their lives.
They need help – and society needs to keep guns out of their reach.
America has now suffered around 30 shooting massacres over the past 30 years, including this year’s deadly dozen; each is a gut-wrenching tragedy for many families.
And yet, each time, gun owners scream that freedom will be eliminated if they are unable to buy assault weapons and 100-round clips.
The bloodbath in Newtown is the time to stop feeding this gun frenzy.
Australia and other countries provide models of how to do it: regulate and limit gun ownership to approved uses.
America’s real freedoms depend on sane public policy.
America’s G-Zero Moment
NEW YORK – The 2008 financial crisis marked the end of the global order as we knew it.
In advance of the upcoming G-8 summit, it is impossible to overlook the fact that, for the first time in seven decades, the United States cannot drive the international agenda or provide global leadership on all of today’s most pressing problems.
Indeed, the US has trimmed its presence abroad by refusing to contribute to a eurozone bailout, intervene in Syria, or use force to contain Iran’s nuclear breakout (despite strong Israeli support).
President Barack Obama officially ended the war in Iraq, and is withdrawing US troops from Afghanistan at a pace constrained only by the need to save face.
America is handing off the leadership baton – even if no other country or group of countries is willing or able to grasp it.
In short, US foreign policy may be as active as ever, but it is downsizing and becoming more exacting about its priorities.
As a result, many global challenges – climate change, trade, resource scarcity, international security, cyber-warfare, and nuclear proliferation, to name a few – are bound to loom larger.
Welcome to the G-Zero world, a more turbulent, uncertain environment in which coordination on global policy issues falls by the wayside.
Paradoxically, this new environment, though daunting, is less troublesome for the US; in fact, it provides fresh opportunities for the US to capitalize on its unique position.
The G-Zero world is not all bad for the US – if it plays its cards right.
Many residual strengths take on greater importance in such a world, and America remains the world’s only true superpower and its largest economy – still more than twice the size of China’s.
Its defense expenditures represent nearly half the world total, and exceed those of the next 17 countries combined.
The dollar remains the world’s reserve currency, and investors’ scramble into US government debt at every peak in the crisis since 2008 has underscored America’s safe-haven status (even in crises that America caused).
Likewise, the US continues to lead in entrepreneurship, research and development, higher education, and technological innovation.
Moreover, it is now the world’s largest natural-gas producer and calorie exporter, which has reduced its vulnerability to price shocks or food shortages.
No country rivals America’s promotion of the rule of law, liberal democracy, transparency, and free enterprise.
While other countries certainly support these values, only the US has been willing, healthy, and big enough to ensure that they prevail.
So, as America curtails its global leadership, it will find itself in more demand.
Consider Asia, for example.&nbsp;As China’s economic importance and regional influence grows, its neighbors are seeking to deepen ties with the US.
Japan, Australia, Indonesia, and Taiwan have all recently closed trade and security-related deals with the US.
Even Burma has gotten on board, resuming diplomatic engagement with the US while trying to work its way out of China’s shadow.
In other words, in a G-Zero world, an increasingly aggressive global environment makes the US all the more appealing to countries seeking to hedge their bets.&nbsp;As a result, the US has an opportunity to act more precisely in its own interests.
Supplying less leadership allows the US to weigh opportunity costs before taking action, and to select the issues and circumstances that suit it the best.&nbsp;In this environment, military intervention in Libya does not necessitate the same in Syria.
The extent to which the US will capitalize on these opportunities remains to be seen.
In fact, America’s short-term advantages pose the biggest obstacle to its long-term outlook.
Call this the “safe-haven curse”:&nbsp;as long as the US remains the safest port in any storm, it faces no immediate pressure to address its weaknesses.
For example, for all of the hand-wringing about America’s national debt, investors will continue to loan the US money.
Over the long term, however, US policymakers must make steady progress in restoring confidence in the nation’s fiscal health by cutting politically sacred programs like social security, Medicare, and defense.
Officials will have to put aside short-term motives and party orthodoxy to bolster America’s aging infrastructure, reform its education and immigration systems, and pursue long-term fiscal consolidation.
America’s advantages in the G-Zero world afford it the chance to invest in the future.
But, by cushioning against sufficiently calamitous risks, the same advantages allow the US to procrastinate.
American politicians need to recognize the new G-Zero reality and rebuild America’s domestic sources of strength, even if only incrementally.&nbsp;If they do, the US will have the vigor and flexibility to shape the next world order.
America’s political system usually works well in crises.&nbsp;But, thanks to its residual advantages in a leaderless world, the US need not rely on a crisis to precipitate action.
It need only seize the G-Zero moment.
America’s Houses of Cards
There are times when being proven right brings no pleasure.
For several years, I argued that America’s economy was being supported by a housing bubble that had replaced the stock market bubble of the 1990’s.
But no bubble can expand forever.
With middle-class incomes in the United States stagnating, Americans could not afford ever more expensive homes.
As one of my predecessors as Chairman of the US President’s Council of Economic Advisers famously put it, “that which is not sustainable will not be sustained.”
Economists, as opposed to those who make their living gambling on stocks, make no claim to being able to predict when the day of reckoning will come, much less identifying the event that will bring down the house of cards.
But the patterns are systematic, with consequences that unfold gradually, and painfully, over time.
There is a macro-story and a micro-story here.
The macro-story is simple, but dramatic.
Some, observing the crash of the sub-prime mortgage market, say, “Don’t worry, it is only a problem in the real estate sector.”
But this overlooks the key role that the housing sector has played in the US economy recently, with direct investment in real estate and money taken out of houses through refinancing mortgages accounting for two-thirds to three-quarters of growth over the last six years.
Booming home prices gave Americans the confidence, and the financial wherewithal, to spend more than their income.
America’s household savings rate was at levels not seen since the Great Depression, either negative or zero.
With higher interest rates depressing housing prices, the game is over.
As America moves to, say, a 4% savings rate (still small by normal standards), aggregate demand will weaken, and with it, the economy.
The micro-story is more dramatic.
Record-low interest rates in 2001, 2002 and 2003 did not lead Americans to invest more – there was already excess capacity.
Instead, easy money stimulated the economy by inducing households to refinance their mortgages, and to spend some of their capital.
It is one thing to borrow to make an investment, which strengthens balance sheets; it is another thing to borrow to finance a vacation or a consumption binge.
But this is what Alan Greenspan encouraged Americans to do.
When normal mortgages did not prime the pump enough, he encouraged them to take out variable-rate mortgages – at a time when interest rates had nowhere to go but up.
Predatory lenders went further, offering negative amortization loans, so the amount owed went up year after year.
Sometime in the future, payments would rise, but borrowers were told, again, not to worry: house prices would rise faster, making it easy to refinance with another negative amortization loan.
The only way (in this view) not to win was to sit on the sidelines.
All of this amounted to a human and economic disaster in the making.
Now reality has hit: newspapers report cases of borrowers whose mortgage payments exceed their entire income.
Globalization implies that America’s mortgage problem has worldwide repercussions.
The first run on a bank occurred against the British mortgage lender Northern Rock.
America managed to pass off bad mortgages worth hundreds of billions of dollars to investors (including banks) around the world.
They buried the bad mortgages in complicated instruments, buried them so deep that no one knew exactly how badly they were impaired, and no one could calculate how to re-price them quickly.
In the face of such uncertainty, markets froze.
Those in financial markets who believe in free markets have temporarily abandoned their faith.
For the greater good of all (of course, it is never for their own selfish interests), they argued a bailout was necessary.
While the US Treasury and the IMF warned East Asian countries facing financial crises ten years ago against the risks of bail-outs and told them not to raise their interest rates, the US ignored its own lectures about moral hazard effects, bought up billions in mortgages, and lowered interest rates.
But lower short-term interest rates have led to higher medium-term interest rates, which are more relevant for the mortgage market, perhaps because of increasing worries about inflationary pressures.
It may make sense for central banks (or Fannie Mae, America’s major government-sponsored mortgage company) to buy mortgage-backed securities in order to help provide market liquidity.
But those from whom they buy them should provide a guarantee, so the public does not have to pay the price for their bad investment decisions.
Equity owners in banks should not get a free ride.
Securitization, with all of its advantages in sharing risk, has three problems that were not adequately anticipated.
While it meant that American banks were not hit as hard as they would otherwise, America’s bad lending practices have had global effects.
Moreover, securitization contributed to bad lending: in the old days, banks that originated bad loans bore the consequences; in the new world of securitization, the originators could pass the loans onto others.
(As economists would say, problems of asymmetric information have increased.)
In the old days, when borrowers found it impossible to make their payments, mortgages would be restructured; foreclosures were bad for both the borrower and the lender.
Securitization made debt restructuring difficult, if not impossible.
It is the victims of predatory lenders who need government help.
With mortgages amounting to 95% or more of the value of the house, debt restructuring will not be easy.
What is required is to give individuals with excessive indebtedness an expedited way to a fresh start – for example, a special bankruptcy provision allowing them to recover, say, 75% of the equity they originally put into the house, with the lenders bearing the cost.
There are many lessons for America, and the rest of the world; but among them is the need for greater financial sector regulation, especially better protection against predatory lending, and more transparency.
America’s Interest-Rate Puzzle
A great puzzle in today’s world economy is the continued low level of long-term real interest rates in the United States.
Conventional macroeconomists like me look at America’s current-account deficit, now running at 7% of GDP, and know that such vast deficits are inevitably followed by large currency depreciations.
So we expect a substantial depreciation premium on US interest rates.
If the dollar falls 20% more against the euro sometime in the next ten years, US long-term interest rates should be two percentage points higher than euro rates.
If it falls 40% against the yen sometime in the next ten years, US long-term interest rates should be four percentage points higher than Japanese rates.
If it falls 60% against China’s currency, the yuan, sometime in the next ten years, US long-term interest rates should be six percentage points higher than Chinese rates.
But we are not seeing signs of anything like this.
The puzzle is not only that long-term rates are too low when viewed in the international context, but also that they are too low when viewed in America’s domestic context.
The Bush administration continues to have no plans to sew up the veins it has opened with its medieval economic policy, which holds that bleeding revenue from the government cures all economic problems.
This means that unless America’s domestic savings rate rises mightily – which it shows no signs of doing – and unless investment expenditure remains abnormally low for the rest of this decade, the supply of loanable funds to finance investment will soon be much less than demand when the current-account deficit narrows to sustainable levels. But when supply is less than demand, prices rise sharply.
In this case, the price of loanable funds is the real interest rate.
An expectation that interest rates will be high sometime in the next decade should mean high interest rates on long-term bonds today.
Yet financial markets are not pricing dollar depreciation and a rise in long-term US interest rates accordingly.
When we macroeconomists talk to our friends on Wall Street, we find that they don’t view this as a puzzle at all.
On the contrary, they are puzzled about why we view the current low level of US long-term interest rates as worrisome.
From their perspective, today’s high demand for long-term dollar-denominated securities is easily explained: Asian central banks are buying in order to hold down their currencies, the US Treasury is borrowing short (and thus not issuing that many long-term securities), and US companies are not undertaking the kinds of investments that would lead them to issue many long-term bonds.
But for every market mispricing there is a profit opportunity: if long-term interest rates are, indeed, too low and long-term bond prices too high, investors will short long-term US bonds, park the money elsewhere, wait for bond prices to return to fundamentals, and then cover their short positions.
By doing so, they will push prices close to fundamentals today.
Wall Streeters, however, offer a counterargument: for any financial institution to, say, bet on the decline of the dollar against the yuan over the next five years in a serious, leveraged way is to put its survival at risk should the trades go wrong.
And trades do go wrong: remember the collapse of Long-Term Capital Management.
The existence of large financial-market actors that do not care about maximizing their profits magnifies the riskiness of the bets.
If, say, the Bank of China and the Federal Reserve decided to teach speculators a lesson by pushing the dollar’s value relative to the yuan up by 20% for a month, they could do so, bankrupting many financial institutions with short positions.
Similarly, any financial institution that bets on a sharp rise in long-term interest rates over the next five years in a serious, leveraged way also puts its survival at risk.
For where should they park their money?
Real estate rental yields and stock-market payouts are low, and real estate and stock prices may well fall as much as or more than bond prices if interest rates spike.
Only businesses that can borrow long-term now, lock in a low real interest rate, and invest in expanding their capacity can make the domestic bet that interest rates will rise.
But America’s businesses see enough risk in the future to be wary of getting stuck with unutilized capacity.
Economists believe that market forces drive prices to fundamentals.
But we are not careful enough to distinguish situations in which equilibrium-restoring forces are strong from those in which such forces are weak.
The dollar will fall and US long-term interest rates will rise, but only when traders on Wall Street and elsewhere decide that holding dollars and long-term US bonds is more risky in the short run.
When that happens, the long-run future will be now.
America’s Islamist Allies of Convenience
NEW DELHI – In just one decade, the United States has intervened militarily in three Muslim-majority countries and overthrown their governments.
Now the same coalition of American liberal interventionists and neoconservatives that promoted those wars is pushing for punitive airstrikes in Syria without reflecting on how US policy has ended up strengthening Islamists and fostering anti-Americanism.
Indeed, the last “humanitarian intervention” has clearly backfired, turning Libya into a breeding ground for transnational militants.
As the intense US debate about President Barack Obama’s proposed use of military force highlights, the attack-Syria push is not about upholding America’s national interest.
Rather, the desire to protect US “credibility” has become the last refuge of those seeking yet another war in the wider Middle East.
If “credibility” were purged from the debate and the focus placed squarely on advancing long-term US interests, it would become apparent that an attack on Syria might not yield even temporary geopolitical gains.
Beyond the short term, it would unleash major unintended consequences, potentially including an Iraq-style “soft” partition of Syria and the creation of a haven for extremists stretching across much of Islamist-controlled northern Syria and into the Sunni areas of Iraq.
Indeed, an attack would most likely increase America’s reliance on unsavory Islamist rulers in countries ranging from Saudi Arabia and Qatar to Turkey and the United Arab Emirates.
Some Arab monarchs have pledged to bankroll the US attack – an investment that they would easily recover, given that the war talk has already increased oil prices.
Al Qaeda-type groups already have gained ground in the Middle East and North Africa as an unintended byproduct of US policies, creating fertile conditions for stepped-up international terrorism in the coming years.
The US invasion and occupation of Iraq, for example, created a major opening for Al Qaeda, whose affiliates now represent the Sunni struggle against the Shia-dominated government.
Likewise, regime change in Libya aided the rise of Al Qaeda-linked militants, leading to the killing in Benghazi of the US ambassador.
A system based on sharia (Islamic law) has been imposed, human-rights abuses are legion, and cross-border movement of weapons and militants has undermined the security of Libya’s neighbors.
Meanwhile, America’s support for the regimes in Yemen and Saudi Arabia has contributed to the rise of Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula.
In parts of southern Yemen, an Al Qaeda affiliate, Ansar al-Sharia, functions as a de facto government.
In Syria, where sizable chunks of territory are already under Islamist control and the pro-Al Qaeda Al Nusra Front overshadows the US-backed Free Syrian Army, the Obama administration is staring at the bitter harvest of its previous policy choices.
Airstrikes now would merely make matters worse by undercutting the FSA’s grassroots legitimacy and aiding Islamist forces.
Farther east, the US wants an “honorable” exit from Afghanistan – the longest war in its history – through a peace deal with the Taliban, its main battlefield opponent.
In seeking to co-opt the Taliban – an effort that has resulted in the Taliban establishing what amounts to a diplomatic mission in Doha, Qatar – the US is bestowing legitimacy on a thuggish militia that enforces medieval practices in the areas under its control.
America’s dalliances with Islamist-leaning political forces – and governments – have been guided by the notion that the cloak of Islam helps to protect the credibility of leaders who might otherwise be seen as foreign puppets.
That simply will not work, even in the short term.
On the contrary, until the Egyptian army removed him from the presidency, the Muslim Brotherhood’s Mohamed Morsi was coming to be seen by many as America’s man in Cairo.
In the long term, the US will gain nothing – and risk much – by continuing to back oil sheikhdoms that fund Muslim extremist groups and madrasas from the Philippines and India to South Africa and Venezuela.
By supporting Islamist rulers, the US is contributing to a trend evident from the Maghreb to the badlands of Afghanistan and Pakistan – Muslims killing Muslims.
American policy has also contributed to a growing conflict between Islamist and secular forces in Muslim countries.
This is best illustrated by Turkey, where Obama has ignored Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s heavy-handed efforts to annul free speech and turn himself into a twenty-first-century Sultan.
There and elsewhere, the US, motivated by the larger geopolitical goal of containing Shia Iran and its regional allies, has embraced Sunni rulers steeped in religious and political bigotry, even though they pose a transnational threat to the values of freedom and secularism.
Moreover, the clash within Islam is likely to be destabilizing regionally and counterproductive to the interests of the free world.
Against this background, Obama should heed the doctrine proposed in 1991 by General Colin Powell.
The Powell doctrine stipulates that the US should use military force only when a vital national-security interest is at stake; the strategic objective is clear and attainable; the benefits are likely to outweigh the costs; adverse consequences can be limited; broad international and domestic support has been obtained; and a plausible exit strategy is in place.
Given the US record since the doctrine was formulated, another criterion should be added: the main beneficiaries of military intervention are not America’s mortal enemies.
Drone Wars
BRUSSELS – “Sometime they’ll give a war and nobody will come,” the American poet Carl Sandburg wrote hopefully in 1936.
His sentiment seems more apt than ever nowadays, but not because humanity has turned pacifistic.
Rather, wars are increasingly fought remotely, with drones – or unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) – doing the killing.
Under President Barack Obama, the number of drone strikes carried out by the United States has soared, with more than 300 UAV attacks reported in Pakistan alone.
In March 2011, the US Air Force for the first time trained more pilots for drones than for any other purpose.
This raises serious ethical questions.
With no military personnel risking their lives, UAVs make it easier to kill, and to justify war operations to the public at home.
Moreover, a human being’s reticence to kill is inversely related to the distance between attacker and target.
In the case of a pilot flying drones over Yemen by operating a joystick in Nevada, the threshold to pulling the trigger is dangerously low.
Killing is just a part of the job, to be followed by bowling, perhaps, or a quiet evening at home.
Meanwhile, the mere sound of drones terrorizes whole populations, indicating to enemies and civilians alike that they are being watched and might be attacked at any moment – which could well play into the hands of terrorist recruiters.
From a legal and human-rights point of view, the US drone program is even more alarming.
After all, countries such as Pakistan, Yemen, and Somalia do not belong to declared war zones.
Outside the context of war, in turn, state killings are legal only if they prove absolutely necessary to save lives.
They must be conducted either in self-defense after an attack, or in anticipatory self-defense against an immediate threat, when taking time to discuss non-lethal alternatives is not feasible.
More than a decade after September 11, America’s drone program does not fall into the first category of reactive self-defense.
Likewise, there is no evidence that any presumed terrorist who was killed outside of official war zones in the last few years represented a threat so immediate to US citizens’ lives that preventive and premeditated killing was the only option.
Unless US leaders prove otherwise in every case, American UAV attacks in countries like Pakistan or Yemen should be called what they are: extrajudicial killings.
US State Department legal adviser Harold Koh disagrees, arguing that America is involved in a worldwide “armed conflict with Al Qaeda, as well as the Taliban and associated forces.”
So, Koh claims, drone attacks are part of a global war, fought both in declared war zones and non-war countries; therefore, they are legal.
But, even under this adventurous assumption, human-rights issues arise.
The laws of war condone targeted killings only of “combatants” who “directly participate in hostilities.”
The killings must be proportionate, strategically necessary, and publicly justified.
Avoiding harm to civilians should be the top priority.
At the slightest sign of illegality, an investigation must be conducted, offenders prosecuted, and victims compensated.
The US drone program’s legal basis is entirely unclear, however.
Given that most information about UAV activity is classified, it is impossible to know whether all drone targets directly participated in hostilities.
And, while the Obama administration’s claim of zero or single-digit civilian fatalities may be true according to the official definition, it rests on the premise that any military-age male killed in a drone strike is a militant, unless intelligence posthumously proves otherwise.
A recent report by the law schools at Stanford University and New York University concludes that, in reality, civilian casualties in Pakistan may have accounted for up to 75% of all UAV victims between 2008 and 2011.
Others estimate a lower, but still alarming, rate of 30%.
The legal obligation of proportionality is clearly being violated.
Accountability is also being flouted.
Drone operations are carried out by the Central Intelligence Agency, an organization whose activities are shrouded in secrecy.
And, unlike military personnel, CIA agents enjoy extensive immunity, undermining international legal standards.
Without increased transparency, to declare America’s UAV campaign legal is impossible, both in the context of war and outside of armed conflict.
As long as the US keeps the rest of the world in the dark, illegal acts – including possible war crimes – may be committed with impunity.
Just as citizens worldwide are demanding increased economic and financial accountability, more pressure must be placed on the US to either prove that its drone activities are necessary and legal, or to stop them immediately.
Victims of UAV attacks, their families, and civil-society groups have begun to speak out against America’s questionable drone campaign, and to pursue legal action.
Others should feel encouraged to follow suit.
In the meantime, every drone strike will not only undermine human rights and international humanitarian law, but will also further widen a legal loophole that other governments and armed groups will not hesitate to exploit.
The US drone program does not make the world a safer place; it creates an environment in which unlawful killings can happen virtually anywhere, at any time, violating the fundamental human right not to be arbitrarily deprived of one’s life.
America’s Locust Years
BERKELEY – It is hard right now to write about American political economy.
Nobody knows whether the debt-ceiling tripwire will be evaded; if so, how; or what will happen if it is not.
If no deal to raise the debt ceiling is reached by August 3, interest rates on United States Treasury bonds could spike, or they could remain stable, as investors decide they have other problems to worry about.
Or the US Federal Reserve, the Peoples Bank of China (PBC), or both – or even some other body – could support the market.
Or interest rates could rise if people expect a much weaker global economy – and, in a weaker global economy with no inflation, investors should be holding more US Treasuries, not fewer.
Frankly, no one knows what legislative deal will be struck to raise the debt ceiling.
All we know as of this writing is that a deal would probably involve cuts in near-term spending, meaning weaker growth and higher unemployment over the next 18 months.
And we can assume that it would be repealed and replaced by something else come January 2013, either by a re-elected President Barack Obama, or by a new, Republican president.
So, rather than talking about the US debt ceiling, let us think instead about all of the things that the debt-ceiling impasse has prevented the US government from doing during the past six months – all of the useful policies that might have been debated and enacted, but were not.
The risks imposed by global warming, for example, have not gone away.
The sooner the world starts preparing to deal with those threats, the better.
Another six months should not be lost.
The employment-to-population ratio in the US remains flat – mired at the very low levels to which it fell during the recession.
With households desperately trying to rebuild their balance sheets, and with capital investment remarkably healthy, the only places to boost spending to restore capacity utilization and unemployment to normal levels are exports, government purchases, and construction investment.
But opportunities to pursue the necessary policies have not been grasped.
Here, too, another six months should not be lost.
Likewise, the US could have fulfilled its normal role as the conductor of the international economic orchestra. It has not, even as the European Union continues to respond inadequately to its own slow-moving solvency crises.
The mandarins of northern Europe continue to measure out a drip-feed of support with coffee spoons.
Another six months have been lost.
America faces long-run and short-run problems: decaying infrastructure, weakening educational systems, and a dysfunctional health-care system that produces sub-standard outcomes at twice the cost of any other industrial country.
Solving any of these three problems would go a long way toward resolving the long-run financing imbalance between current tax rates and America’s long-run social-insurance promises that the debt-ceiling debate’s instigators supposedly want to address.
But the US government won’t address them. Six months that could have been spent boosting the long-run growth potential of the American economy through infrastructure investment, educational reform, or an overhaul of health-care financing – greatly easing America's long-run deficit and debt dilemmas in the process – have been lost.
During the run-up to World War II, Winston Churchill, speaking in Parliament, lamented “the years that the locusts hath eaten” – the period during which preparatory action to face the great crisis of his day (the rise of Continental fascism) could have been taken, but was not.
Over the past century – with the notable exception of the Great Depression – the US political system has been remarkably good at foreseeing crises long before they have happened, and at least setting the foundation for dealing with them when they have occurred.
But so far in the third millennium, this skill – or simply run of luck – has deserted the US.
My view is that the problem would fix itself easily if only the Republican Party of Dwight D. Eisenhower could stage a comeback (though without Richard Nixon and Joseph McCarthy).
It is becoming increasingly clear, however, that the problem is one not only for the US, but for the rest of the world as well.
Since December 7, 1941, the world has in large part been able to rely on global governance by a somewhat-competent hyperpower.
That America may be gone for good.
If it is, the world needs to develop other institutions for global management – and quickly.
America’s Misguided Immigration Debate
A debate on immigration is beginning in the United States Senate, which will take up several proposals.
These include a hateful bill – which the House of Representatives has already approved – that provides for the construction of a wall along the US-Mexican border and makes unauthorized entry into the US a felony.
The US Senate will also consider a bill co-authored by Senator Edward Kennedy and Senator John McCain, which proposes stronger border enforcement, a temporary workers program with a path to residency and citizenship, and legalization for people already in the US without papers.
Another idea is to require anyone in the US wanting to regularize their immigration status to go home and wait in line there.
This last component is largely rhetoric; it is hard to imagine any Mexican already in the US voluntarily returning to, say, Zacatecas to wait patiently in line for a new visa.
President George W. Bush has been skirting the question ever since he committed himself to an immigration agreement with Mexico when he visited President Vicente Fox in Guanajuato almost exactly five years ago.
There was a time when north-south migratory flows in the western hemisphere were limited to Mexico and the Caribbean.
That changed in the 1980’s, when Central America’s civil wars sent hundreds of thousands of migrants thru Mexico to the US, and then in the 1990’s, when people fleeing violence in Colombia, Venezuela, Peru, and Ecuador also began searching for opportunity.
Today, even Brazil, traditionally a country of immigration, has become one of emigration.
Moreover, these migrants are no longer exclusively of rural origin, nor do they travel only to traditional areas in the US; they are, literally, everywhere.
Their remittances contribute immensely to the economic welfare of their families, communities, and home countries’ economies.
Thus, whatever immigration policy emerges in the US will have an enormous impact south of the Rio Grande well beyond Mexico.
This will occur precisely at a time when Latin America is swerving left, with country after country drifting back to anti-American, populist stances: Venezuela in 1999, Bolivia last year, perhaps Mexico, Peru, and Nicaragua later this year.
If the perception of further US hostility toward Latin America persists, the tilt toward an irresponsible, demagogic left will harden.
The responsible left in Chile, Brazil, and Uruguay are an exception to the emerging rule set by Venezuela’s President Hugo Chávez.
The best way to accentuate the region’s growing anti-American sentiment is to try to close the US-Mexican border (which will be futile).
Instead, the US should establish humane, secure, and legal mechanisms of temporary or permanent entry for people the American economy needs and wants, and it should work with, not against, governments in Latin America.
Five years ago, Mexico’s President Vicente Fox tried to convince Bush that something had to be done before a nativist backlash in the US complicated its relations with Latin America and made goals such as a Free Trade Agreement of the Americas (FTAA) impossible.
But matters have gotten worse: border tensions between the US and Mexico have grown, the proposed wall has rightly provoked indignation, more unauthorized immigrants than ever are entering the US, and the FTAA has collapsed.
Bush must begin to use what political capital he has left to support enlightened immigration reform, along the lines of the Kennedy-McCain bill.
He will never get a guest-worker program without Democratic support, which in turn is unlikely unless the White House supports access to a program for unauthorized immigrants already in the US that includes some type of path to residence and citizenship.
Mexico and the US must be sensitive to domestic political concerns in both countries.
No immigration deal is feasible north of the border without addressing security matters; south of the border, there is no conceivable Mexican cooperation on border security or on a Temporary Workers Program if immigration reform ignores the nearly five million Mexican citizens without papers currently living in the US.
Mexico must act on what Fox has called “shared responsibility.”
The best imaginable deal between the US and Mexico, or the best imaginable US immigration reform, will not eliminate the flow of undocumented migrants from Mexico and South America overnight.
Mexico has to assume responsibility for regulating this traffic, which means more than sealing off its southern border.
The government could, for example, double welfare payments to households whose male heads stay home, threaten to revoke land reform rights after years of absence in rural communities, and establish choke points on highways at the Tehuantepec Isthmus.
Fox has said that he is willing to break with old Mexican taboos, but the Bush administration has never taken him up on it.
That is unfortunate, because Fox will not be around forever.
Immigration has always been an immensely complex and delicate issue inside the US, and now for Latin America as well.
A window of opportunity opened at the beginning of Bush’s first term, and closed shut after the terrorist attacks of September 2001.
It is opening again and should be taken advantage of before it is too late.
Why Iran Won’t Budge
TEL AVIV – No one really believed that the latest round of international negotiations with Iran over its nuclear program would produce a breakthrough.
So it was no surprise that itdid not, despite the concessions that were made at the meeting in Kazakhstan by the P5+1 (China, France, Russia, the United Kingdom, and the United States, plus Germany).
America’s belief that a harsh sanctions regime could coax Iran into a deal has proved – at least so far – to be unrealistic.
Despite being isolated and ostracized, Iran has managed to gain some strategic breathing room with the help of countries like China, Russia, India, Syria, and Venezuela, allowing it to resist Western pressure.
More important, even though the severe sanctions regime led by the United States is bound to be imperfect – it only hardens further Iran’s resistance to “America’s designs.”
To be sure, Iran’s alliances are vulnerable to erosion and, in the case of two staunch allies, Syria and Venezuela, to outright collapse.
The end of Chavismo would threaten Iran’s vast interests in Venezuela and its considerable presence in the Andes, while the fall of the Assad dynasty would be a devastating blow to Iran’s regional strategy.
Even so, Russia and China continue to take a much more lenient approach to Iran than Europe and the US have since the International Atomic Energy Agency’s report in November 2011 described in detail Iran’s activities in pursuing the capability to produce nuclear weapons.
While the Western powers have embraced ever-harsher sanctions, Russia and China view Iran as a tool in their global competition with the US.
China’s Iranian interests boil down to economics.
Bilateral trade stands at about $40 billion a year, and China is not only Iran’s largest customer for crude oil, but also a colossal investor – somewhere between $40 billion and $100 billion – in Iran’s energy and transport sectors.
True, China cannot entirely overlook US pressure and the staunch opposition of its top oil supplier, Saudi Arabia, to Iran’s nuclear program.
But, while China has supported the mandatory sanctions set by the United Nations Security Council, it has rejected the West’s unilateral measures.
With bilateral trade worth only about $5 billion annually, Russia’s economic interests in Iran are fairly modest.
But it fears Iran’s ability to cause trouble, particularly by stirring up unrest among Russia’s Muslim citizens.
Moreover, America has refused to pay the Kremlin’s high price – curtailment of congressional human-rights legislation, repeal of Cold-War-era restrictions on Russian-US trade, and abandonment of plans for ballistic missile defense in Europe – for Russian support on Iran (or, for that matter, on any other trouble spot, such as Syria).
The problem with the US drive to have key stakeholders join its anti-Iran crusade is that some of them live in neighborhoods where Iran is an important factor.
India is a case in point.
India is certainly alarmed at the possibility of Iran developing nuclear weapons, not to mention its concern at the possible effects of Iran’s Islamist fundamentalism on Kashmiri Muslims.
But its $14 billion in annual bilateral trade, and dependence on Iranian oil – many of India’s refineries have been built to run solely on Iranian crude – are key strategic considerations.
Moreover, India needs Iran as an alternative trade and energy conduit to Central Asia, bypassing rival Pakistan, and also as a hedge against an uncertain future in Afghanistan after America’s withdrawal in 2014.
As a result, India’s policy mirrors China’s: it has aligned itself with mandatory international sanctions, but has abjured voluntary Western financial restrictions.
The best one can expect is that India continues to act at the margin –&#160;for example, by reducing dependence on Iranian oil while increasing imports from Saudi Arabia, already its largest supplier of crude.
The equivocal nature of Iran’s alliances, however, can be a mixed blessing.
Yes, a harsh sanctions regime might still gain additional supporters, but an Iran with its back against the wall would probably be even more obstinate in its nuclear drive.
After all, Iraq was an easy target in the first Gulf War precisely because it had abandoned its nuclear program, and possessed no weapons of mass destruction.
Similarly, Libya’s Muammar el-Qaddafi exposed himself to a NATO onslaught by relinquishing his WMDs.
By contrast, North Korea shows that defiance, rather than accommodation, is a strategy that works.
That is why Syria, with North Korean assistance, tried to develop a nuclear program (presumably destroyed by Israel’s officially unacknowledged “Operation Orchard” in 2007).Iran will not consider abandoning its nuclear insurance policy unless a broad agenda is agreed upon that addresses Iran’s concerns as a regional power and secures the immunity of its Islamist regime from American actions.
Albert Einstein’s definition of insanity as “doing the same thing over and over again and expecting different results” could be applied to America’s Iran policy.
The diplomacy of sanctions, ostracism, and brinkmanship has failed resoundingly.
As Iran’s uranium-enrichment and other weapons-development activities continue unabated, the US needs to make a break with the old rules of engagement.
America’s Misplaced Deficit Complacency
CAMBRIDGE – The United States still faces a dangerous fiscal deficit, but one might not know it from the complacency that dominates budget discussions in Washington.
Regarded as an urgent problem until recently, the federal deficit is now being placed on the back burner of American politics.
The shift in thinking was triggered by the revised deficit forecasts recently published by the Congressional Budget Office, the independent technical agency responsible for advising Congress on budget issues.
According to the CBO’s report, the US fiscal deficit will decline from 7% of GDP in 2012 to 4% in 2013.
This reduction reflects the cuts in government spending on defense and non-defense programs mandated by the budget “sequester” that took effect in March, as well as the rise in revenue caused by higher rates for income and payroll taxes since the end of 2012.
More striking is the CBO’s projection that the deficit will continue to decline rapidly, reaching just 2.1% of GDP in 2015, before rising gradually to just 3.5% of GDP in 2023, the end of the CBO’s official forecast period.
That path of deficits implies that the government debt/GDP ratio will remain at about the current level of 75% for the next ten years.
Unfortunately, these headline-grabbing numbers are not likely to be borne out in reality; indeed, even the CBO does not believe that they represent what will occur.
Instead, these official forecasts represent a “baseline” scenario that the CBO is required to present.
The CBO’s “baseline budget” assumes that all of the deficit-reducing features in current law will remain unchanged.
These include, for example, an old legislative requirement that payments to physicians in the government’s Medicare program be reduced sharply in future years, a requirement that Congress has voted each year to “postpone.”
In order to provide better guidance, the CBO presents an “alternative fiscal scenario,” in which such very unlikely features are removed from the forecast.
The alternative forecast implies that the annual budget deficit at the end of ten years will be back up to 4.7% of GDP, with the debt/GDP ratio at 83% and rising.
And those estimates are based on the optimistic assumption that the economy will have returned gradually to full employment with low inflation and moderate interest rates.
Officials and others who favor stimulating growth through increased government spending ignore the CBO’s more realistic alternative scenario.
They buttress their argument that the deficit is not an immediate problem by pointing to very low interest rates on long-term government debt, with a 2% yield on the ten-year Treasury bond and a negative real interest rate on Treasury inflation-protected bonds (TIPS).
But such low rates do not reflect ordinary market sentiment; rather, they stem from the fact that the Federal Reserve is now buying more long-term securities than the government is issuing to finance the budget deficit.
Looking further ahead, the CBO warns that the combination of a rapidly aging population and the increase in medical costs will cause the deficit to rise rapidly, driven by the higher costs of pension and health-care benefits for middle-income retirees.
According to the CBO, without legislative changes, the fiscal deficit in 2037 will be 17% of GDP, while the national debt will increase to more than 195% of GDP.
A large and rising national debt is a serious danger to an economy’s health.
Higher debt-service costs require higher tax rates, which in turn weaken incentives and reduce economic growth.
By the end of the decade, the US will have to pay an amount equivalent to more than one-third of the revenue from personal-income taxes just to pay the interest on the national debt.
Foreign investors now hold more than half of that debt.
Paying interest to them requires sending more goods and services to the rest of the world than the US receives from the rest of the world.
That requires a weaker dollar to make US goods more attractive to foreign buyers and to make foreign goods more expensive to American consumers.
The weaker dollar reduces the US standard of living.
A large national debt also limits the government’s ability to respond to emergencies, including both military threats and economic downturns.
And it makes the US vulnerable to changes in financial-market sentiment, as the European experience has shown.
Reducing future deficits and reversing the rise in the national debt require raising tax revenue and slowing the growth of government pension and health-care programs.
Tax revenue can be raised without increasing marginal tax rates by limiting the tax subsidies that are built into the current tax code.
Those subsidies are a hidden form of government spending on everything from home mortgages and health insurance to the purchase of hybrid cars and residential solar panels.
Slowing the growth of the pension and health-care programs for middle-class retirees cannot be done abruptly.
It must begin by giving notice to those who are now a decade away from retirement – which is why it is important to launch such reforms now.
Unfortunately, the new complacency about future deficits makes it difficult, if not impossible, to enact the legislation needed to begin the process of trimming America’s long-term fiscal deficit.
It is important for policymakers and the public alike to understand the real fiscal outlook and the damage that high deficits will cause if prompt action is not taken.
Merely moving the problem to the back burner will not prevent it from boiling over.
Meeting America’s Growth Challenge
BERKELEY – The United States continues to recover from its deepest economic slump since the Great Depression, but the pace of recovery remains frustratingly slow.
There are several reasons to anticipate modest improvement in 2013, although, as usual, there are downside risks.
Prolonged recession or a financial crisis in Europe and slower growth in emerging markets are the main external sources of potential danger.
At home, political infighting underlies the two greatest risks: failure to reach a deal to raise the debt ceiling and an additional round of fiscal contraction that stymies economic growth.
Since 2010, tepid average annual GDP growth of 2.1% has meant weak job creation.
In both this recovery and the previous two, the rebound in employment growth has been weaker and later than the rebound in GDP growth.
But the loss of jobs in the most recent recession was more than twice as large as in previous recessions, so a slow recovery has meant a much higher unemployment rate for a much longer period.
Weak aggregate demand is the primary culprit for subdued GDP and employment growth.
The 2008 recession was triggered by a financial crisis that erupted after the collapse of a credit-fueled asset bubble decimated the housing market.
Private-sector demand contracts sharply and recovers only slowly after such crises.
The private-sector financial balance swung from a deficit of 3.7% of GDP in 2006, at the height of the boom, to a surplus of about 6.8% of GDP in 2010 and about 5% today.
This represents the sharpest contraction and weakest recovery in private-sector demand since the end of World War II.
Growth in two components of private demand, residential investment and consumption, which account for more than 75% of total spending in the US economy, has been especially slow.
Both sources of demand are likely to strengthen in 2013.
Residential investment is still at an historic low as a share of GDP as a result of overbuilding during the 2003-2008 housing boom and the tsunami of foreclosures that followed.
But the headwinds in the housing market are dissipating.
Home sales, prices, and construction all rose last year, while foreclosures declined.
Residential investment should be a source of output and job growth this year.
Large losses in household wealth, deleveraging from unsustainable debt, weak wage growth, and a decline in labor’s share of national income to a historic low have combined to constrain consumption growth.
Real median household income is still nearly 7% below its 2007 peak, real median household net worth dropped by 35% between 2005 and 2010 (and remains significantly below its pre-recession peak), and about 90% of the income gains during the recovery have gone to the top 1%.
To be sure, the balance-sheet headwinds holding back consumption have eased.
Households have slashed their debt – often through painful foreclosures and bankruptcies – and their debt relative to income has sunk to its 2005 level, significantly below its 2008 peak. &#160;Helped by low interest rates, debt service relative to household income has fallen back to levels not seen since the early 1980’s.
But consumption will be hit by the expiration of the payroll tax cut, which will reduce household income by about $125 billion this year.
Another factor holding back recovery has been weak growth in spending on goods and services by both state and local governments, and more recently by the federal government.
Indeed, since the recession’s onset, state and local governments have cut nearly 600,000 jobs and reduced spending for infrastructure projects by 20%.
The fiscal trends for 2013 are mixed, but negative overall.
While state and local government cutbacks in spending and employment are ending as the recovery boosts their tax revenues, the fiscal drag at the federal level is strengthening.
The American Taxpayer Relief Act – the tax deal reached in early January to avoid the “fiscal cliff” – shaves about $750 billion from the deficit over the next ten years and could take a percentage point off the 2013 growth rate.
In addition, although less widely appreciated, significant reductions in federal spending are already under way, with more likely to come.
Spending cuts and revenue increases that have been legislated since 2011 will reduce the projected deficit by $2.4 trillion over the next decade, with three-quarters coming from spending cuts, almost exclusively in non-defense discretionary programs.
Based on current economic assumptions, the US needs about $4 trillion in savings to stabilize the debt/GDP ratio over the next decade.
It is already three-fifths of the way there.
The so-called sequester (the across-the-board spending cuts scheduled to begin in March), would slash another $100 billion this year and $1.2 trillion over the next decade.
Although it could stabilize the debt/GDP ratio, the sequester would be a mistake: it fails to distinguish among spending priorities, would undermine essential programs, and would mean another significant dent in growth this year.
Moreover, despite the warnings of deficit alarmists, the US does not face an imminent debt crisis.
Currently, the federal debt held by the public is just over 70% of GDP, a level not seen since the early 1950’s.
However, government debt soars by an average of 86% after severe financial crises, so the increase in the federal debt by 70% between 2008 and 2012 is not surprising.
Nor is it alarming.
The US economy grew rapidly for several years after WWII with a higher debt/GDP ratio, and today’s ratio is lower than in all other major industrial countries (and roughly half that of Greece, analogies to which are absurd and misleading).
During the last two years, Washington has been obsessed with the need to cut the deficit and put the debt/GDP ratio on a “sustainable” path, even as global investors have flocked to US government debt, driving interest rates to historic lows.
The considerable progress that has been made on deficit reduction over the next ten years has been overlooked.
Also overlooked have been the immediate challenges of low growth, weak investment, and high unemployment.
It is time to refocus.
The US needs a plan for faster growth, not more deficit reduction.
Evsey Domar, a legendary growth economist (and one of my MIT professors) counseled that the problem of alleviating the debt burden is essentially a problem of achieving growth in national income.
We should heed his wisdom.
America’s New Progressive Era?
NEW YORK – In 1981, US President Ronald Reagan came to office famously declaring that, “Government is not the solution to our problem.
Government is the problem.”
Thirty-two years and four presidents later, Barack Obama’s recent inaugural address, with its ringing endorsement of a larger role for government in addressing America’s – and the world’s – most urgent challenges, looks like it may bring down the curtain on that era.
Reagan’s statement in 1981 was extraordinary.
It signaled that America’s new president was less interested in using government to solve society’s problems than he was in cutting taxes, mainly for the benefit of the wealthy.

They demanded tax cuts, and got them; they demanded a rollback of environmental protection, and got it; they demanded, and received, the right to attack unions; and they demanded lucrative government contracts, even for paramilitary operations, and got those, too.
For more than three decades, no one really challenged the consequences of turning political power over to the highest bidders.
In the meantime, America went from being a middle-class society to one increasingly divided between rich and poor.
CEOs who were once paid around 30 times what their average workers earned now make around 230 times that amount.
Once a world leader in the fight against environmental degradation, America was the last major economy to acknowledge the reality of climate change.
Financial deregulation enriched Wall Street, but ended up creating a global economic crisis through fraud, excessive risk-taking, incompetence, and insider dealing.
Maybe, just maybe, Obama’s recent address marks not only the end of this destructive agenda, but also the start of a new era.
Indeed, he devoted almost the entire speech to the positive role of government in providing education, fighting climate change, rebuilding infrastructure, taking care of the poor and disabled, and generally investing in the future.
It was the first inaugural address of its kind since Reagan turned America away from government in 1981.
If Obama’s speech turns out to mark the start of a new era of progressive politics in America, it would fit a pattern explored by one of America’s great historians, Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., who documented roughly 30-year intervals between periods of what he called “private interest” and “public purpose.”
In the late 1800’s, America had its Gilded Age, with the creation of large new industries by the era’s “robber barons” accompanied by massive inequality and corruption.
The subsequent Progressive Era was followed by a temporary return to plutocracy in the 1920’s.
Then came the Great Depression, Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal, and another 30 years of progressive politics, from the 1930’s to the 1960’s.
The 1970’s were a transition period to the Age of Reagan – 30 years of conservative politics led by powerful corporate interests.
It is certainly time for a rebirth of public purpose and government leadership in the US to fight climate change, help the poor, promote sustainable technologies, and modernize America’s infrastructure.
If America realizes these bold steps through purposeful public policies, as Obama outlined, the innovative science, new technology, and powerful demonstration effects that result will benefit countries around the world.
It is certainly too early to declare a new Progressive Era in America.
Vested interests remain powerful, certainly in Congress – and even within the White House.
These wealthy groups and individuals gave billions of dollars to the candidates in the recent election campaign, and they expect their contributions to yield benefits.
Moreover, 30 years of tax cutting has left the US government without the financial resources needed to carry out effective programs in key areas such as the transition to low-carbon energy.
Still, Obama has wisely thrown down the gauntlet, calling for a new era of government activism.
He is right to do so, because many of today’s crucial challenges – saving the planet from our own excesses; ensuring that technological advances benefit all members of society; and building the new infrastructure that we need nationally and globally for a sustainable future – demand collective solutions.
Implementation of public policy is just as important to good governance as the vision that underlies it.
So the next task is to design wise, innovative, and cost-effective programs to address these challenges.
Unfortunately, when it comes to bold and innovative programs to meet critical human needs, America is out of practice.
It is time to begin anew, and Obama’s full-throated defense of a progressive vision points the US in the right direction.
America’s New Trade Hypocrisy
As the current “development round” of trade talks moves into its final stages, it is becoming increasingly clear that the goal of promoting development will not be served, and that the multilateral trade system will be undermined.
Nowhere is this clearer than in a provision that is supposed to give the least developed countries almost duty-free access to developed countries’ markets.
A year ago, the leaders of the world’s richest countries committed themselves to alleviating the plight of the poorest.
At Doha in November 2001, they pledged to give something more valuable than money: the opportunity for poor countries to sell their goods and earn their way out of poverty.
With great fanfare, developed countries seemed for a while to be making good on their promise, as Europe extended the “Everything but Arms” initiative (EBA), under which it was unilaterally to open its markets to the poorest countries of the world.
The opening was less than it seemed.
The devil is in the details, as many less developed countries discovered that EBA’s complicated rules of origin, together with supply-side constraints, meant that there was little chance for poor countries to export their newly liberalized products.
But the coup de grace was delivered by the world’s richest country, the United States, which once again decided to demonstrate its hypocrisy.
The US ostensibly agreed to a 97% opening of its markets to the poorest countries.
The developing countries were disappointed with the results of Europe’s EBA initiative, and Europe has responded by committing itself to dealing with at least part of the problem that arises from the rules of origin tests.
America’s intention was, to the contrary, to seem to be opening up its markets, while doing nothing of the sort, for it appears to allow the US to select a different 3% for each country.
The result is what is mockingly coming to be called the EBP initiative: developing countries will be allowed freely to export everything but what they produce .
They can export jet engines, supercomputers, airplanes, computer chips of all kinds—just not textiles, agricultural products, or processed foods, the goods they can and do produce.
Consider Bangladesh.
If we go by the most widely used six-digit tariff lines, Bangladesh exported 409 tariff lines to the US in 2004, from which it earned about $2.3 billion.
But its top 12 tariff lines – 3% of all tariff lines – accounted for 59.7% of the total value of its exports to the US.
This means that the US could erect barriers to almost three-fifths of Bangladeshi exports.
For Cambodia, the figure would be about 62%.
The situation is no better if the 3% rule applies to the tariff lines that the US imports from the rest of the world (rather than to the lines individual poor countries export to the US), for then the US can exclude roughly 300 tariff lines from duty-free and quota-free treatment.
For Bangladesh, this implies that 75% of the tariff lines, accounting for more than 90% of the value of its exports to the US, could be excluded from duty-free treatment.
Exclusion from duty-free treatment could reach 100% for Cambodia, which exported only 277 tariff lines to the US in 2004.
The official argument for the 3% exclusion is that it affects “sensitive products.”
In other words, while the US lectures developing countries on the need to face the pain of rapid adjustment to liberalization, it refuses to do the same.
(Indeed, it has already had more than 11 years to adjust to liberalization of textiles.)
But the real problem is far worse because the 3% exclusion raises the specter of an odious policy of divide and conquer, as developing countries are invited to vie with each other to make sure that America does not exclude
Indeed, there may be a further hidden agenda behind the 97% proposal.
At the World Trade Organization’s meeting Cancun in 2003, the developing countries stood together and blocked efforts to forge a trade agreement that was almost as unfair as the previous Uruguay round, under which the poorest countries actually became worse off.
It was imperative that such unity be destroyed.
America’s strategy of bilateral trade agreements was aimed at precisely that, but it enlisted only a few countries, representing a fraction of global trade.
The 97% formula holds open the possibility of extending that fragmentation
AGOA had a sunset clause, but if the duty-free access becomes permanent for less developed countries in Africa – as stipulated in Hong Kong – then poor countries in Asia will continue to lose US market share.
The WTO is supposed to prevent these trade-diversionary agreements, but so far no case has been successfully brought.
Even if America succeeds in dividing the developing countries, however, it may inspire a degree of unity elsewhere.
Both those committed to trade liberalization within a multilateral system and those committed to helping developing countries will look at America’s new strategy with abhorrence.
Game Changers for Growth
BERKELEY – The recent G-20 meeting of finance ministers in Saint Petersburg confirmed that the debate between growth and austerity is over – at least for now.
With protracted recession in Europe and slowdowns in emerging markets, concern about budget deficits has given way to apprehension about growth.
In July, the International Monetary Fund revised its global growth forecast downward for the second time this year.
Both Japan and the United States stand out as bright spots in the subdued global outlook, but for different reasons.
In Japan, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has unleashed a combination of aggressive monetary and fiscal expansion along with promised reforms of the labor market, corporate governance, regulation, and trade.
In response to rapid and bold stimulus measures, Japan’s economy is expected to grow at a rate of around 3% this year – one of the highest rates among advanced economies – and the Nikkei index rose 80% in the six-month period ending in May of this year.
Now Abe has signaled his intention to move forward with tough structural reforms.
If he delivers, his policies will be game changers for Japan.
In the US, the story is one of continued recovery as the headwinds slowing growth dissipate.
State- and local-government budgets are improving, the housing market is strengthening, and households are deleveraging and repairing their balance sheets.
Counterproductive and excessive fiscal austerity at the federal level has dampened growth this year, but the private sector has proved more resilient than expected.
Under current law, fiscal contraction is slated to ease next year and monetary policy is likely to remain supportive, so most forecasters predict an acceleration of growth.
But growth prospects could be undermined by another bruising political battle over the federal budget, resulting in deep spending cuts.
The current Republican rhetoric in the House of Representatives portends additional fiscal austerity.
Earlier this year, the Congressional Budget Office warned that the potential US growth rate has declined as a result of years of subpar investment rates, the aging of the population, and smaller productivity gains.
Every year of below-capacity growth means lower growth capacity in the future, owing to lost investment, erosion of worker skills and experience, and diminished risk-taking.
Still, there are often-overlooked reasons for optimism about America’s future potential growth.
A recent McKinsey Global Institute study identifies five mutually reinforcing “game changers” that could have a significant effect on GDP growth, productivity, and employment in the US by 2020: shale energy, big-data analytics, exports in knowledge-intensive industries, infrastructure investment, and talent development.
Two of these – shale energy and big-data analytics – build on ongoing technological breakthroughs in which the US has a strong lead and depend primarily on private-sector action, not macroeconomic or structural policies.
US production of shale gas and oil has been growing by more than 50% annually over the last five years.
As a result of increasing supplies, US natural-gas prices have declined by two-thirds since 2008 and are likely to remain significantly lower than prices in the rest of the world at least through 2020.
This price advantage will enhance America’s competitiveness as a manufacturing location, particularly for energy-intensive activities.
The US has the largest recoverable shale-gas reserves and the second-largest recoverable shale-oil reserves in the world.
It also enjoys a technological lead in shale-energy technologies, and it already has a vast network of pipelines, refineries, and ports in the energy sector that can be repurposed for shale gas and oil (though much more investment will be needed).
Growth in shale energy will mean more investment, production, and jobs in the energy sector itself.
Lower gas prices will boost manufacturing production, particularly in downstream industries like petrochemicals and primary metals that use natural gas as fuel and feedstock.
Growth in energy and energy-intensive industries will fuel additional demand, output, and employment across a wide swath of supporting activities, including transportation, construction, and professional services.
Overall, McKinsey estimates that growth in shale energy could add 2-4% to annual GDP and create up to 1.7 million jobs by 2020.
But extracting shale energy involves environmental risks and uncertainties, among them groundwater contamination, higher methane emissions, and potential seismic effects.
And shale gas emits CO2 when burned, even though it has half the carbon content of coal and has played a significant role in cutting US carbon emissions to mid-1990’s levels. &#160;
Not surprisingly, the President of the Natural Resources Defense Council, an admired environmental group, recently remarked that “fracking is about the most complicated thing I have encountered.”
More research on the environmental risks and benefits of shale energy, and the development of new standards and regulations to control these risks are required.
Big data and advanced analytics are another technology-driven game changer for US growth.
As more data are generated, stored, and transmitted in digital form, new data sets relevant to personal and business decisions are growing exponentially.
As a result of advances in computing power, the advent of cloud computing, and new software tools, more of these data sets can be quickly analyzed and used by businesses to reduce costs, boost productivity, and create new products and services.
Big data and advanced analytics can also reduce costs and enhance efficiency in health care and government, and can create value for consumers through greater product variety and quality, as well as enhanced convenience – benefits that are not captured in GDP statistics.
McKinsey estimates that big-data analytics could add about $325 billion, or 1.7% to annual GDP in the retail and manufacturing sectors, while generating up to $285 billion in productivity gains and cost savings in health care and government by 2020.
The potential savings in health-care costs would ease pressures on government budgets and release resources to boost growth in the rest of the economy.
New information and communications technologies were game changers that boosted the potential growth rate of the US economy in the 1990’s.
McKinsey’s research suggests that shale energy and big-data technologies will be game changers with similar benefits for the economy’s potential growth over the next several years.
America’s Opposing Futures
I recently learned something interesting: American international finance economists and American domestically oriented macroeconomists have very different – indeed, opposing – views of the likely consequences of America’s huge current-account deficit.
International finance economists see a financial crisis as likely, followed by a painful and perhaps prolonged recession in the United States.
Domestically oriented macroeconomists, by contrast, see a forthcoming fall in the value of the dollar not as a crisis, but as an opportunity to accelerate growth.
Domestically oriented macroeconomists look at the situation roughly like this: at some point in the future, foreign central banks will become less willing to continue buying massive amounts of dollar-denominated securities in order to prop up the greenback.
When they cease their large-scale dollar-purchase programs, the value of the dollar will fall – and it will fall hard.
But, according to this view, as the dollar’s value declines, US exports will become more attractive to foreigners and American employment will rise, with labor re-allocated to the newly-vibrant export sector.
It will be like what happened in Britain after it abandoned its exchange-rate peg and allowed the pound to depreciate relative to the Deutschmark , or what happened in the US in the late 1980’s, when the dollar depreciated against the pound, the Deutschmark , and – most importantly – the Japanese yen.
International finance economists see a far bleaker future.
They see the end of large-scale dollar-purchase programs by central banks leading not only to a decline in the dollar, but also to a spike in US long-term interest rates, which will curb consumption spending immediately and throttle investment spending after only a short lag.
To be sure, international finance economists also see US exports benefiting as the value of the dollar declines, but the lags in demand are such that the export boost will come a year or two after the decline in consumption and investment spending.
Eight to ten million people will have to shift employment from services and construction into exports and import-competing goods, implying that structural unemployment will rise.
Moreover, there may be a financial panic: large financial institutions with short-term liabilities and long-term assets will have a difficult time weathering a large rise in long-term dollar-denominated interest rates.
This mismatch can cause financial stress and bankruptcy just as easily as banks’ local-currency assets and dollar liabilities caused stress and bankruptcy in the Mexican and East Asian crises of the 1990’s and in the Argentinean crisis of this decade.
When international finance economists sketch this scenario, domestically oriented macroeconomists respond that it sounds like a case of incompetent monetary policy.
Why should the Federal Reserve allow long-term interest rates to spike just because other central banks have ceased their dollar-purchase programs?
Should not the Fed step in and replace them with its own purchases of long-term US Treasury bonds, thereby keeping long-term interest rates at a level conducive to full employment?
To this, international finance economists respond that the Fed does not have the power to do so.
When forced to choose between full employment and price stability, the international finance economists say that the Fed will choose price stability, because its institutional memory of the 1970’s, when inflation ran rampant, remains very strong.
Therefore, since a fall in the value of the dollar raises import prices, and thus functions as a negative shock to the supply side of the economy, the Fed will have to raise, not lower, interest rates, and sell, not buy, bonds.
Serious economists whom I respect enormously find themselves taking strong positions on opposite sides of this debate.
I’m not wise enough to say which side is right, but I certainly know which side I hope is wrong.
America’s Other 30%
NEW HAVEN – The American consumer is but a shadow of its former almighty self.
Personal consumption in the United States expanded at only a 1.5% annual rate in real (inflation-adjusted) terms in the second quarter of 2012 – and that was no aberration.
Unfortunately, it continues a pattern of weakness that has been evident since early 2008.
Over the last 18 quarters, annualized growth in real consumer demand has averaged a mere 0.7%, compared to a 3.6% growth trend in the decade before the crisis erupted.
Never before has the American consumer been this weak for this long.
The cause is no secret.
Consumers made huge bets on two bubbles – housing and credit.
Reckless monetary and regulatory policies turned the humble abode into an ATM, allowing families to extract dollars from bubbles and live beyond their means.
Both bubbles have long since burst, and US households are now dealing with post-bubble financial devastation – namely, underwater assets, record-high debt, and profound shortages of savings.
At the same time, sharply elevated unemployment and subpar income growth have combined to tighten the noose on over-extended consumers.
As a result, American households have hunkered down as never before.
Consumers are diverting what little income they earn away from spending toward paying down debt and rebuilding savings.
That is both logical and rational – and thus not something that the US Federal Reserve can offset with unconventional monetary easing.
American consumers’ unprecedented retrenchment has turned the US economy’s growth calculus inside out.
Consumption typically accounts for 70% of GDP (71% in the second quarter, to be precise).
But the 70% is barely growing, and is unlikely to expand strongly at any point in the foreseeable future.
That puts an enormous burden on the other 30% of the US economy to generate any sort of recovery.
In fact, the other 30% has not done a bad job, especially considering the severe headwinds coming from consumers’ 70%.
The 30% mainly consists of four components – capital spending by firms, net exports (exports less imports), residential construction, and government purchases.
(Technically, the pace of inventory investment should be included, but this is a cyclical buffer between production and sales rather than a source of final demand.)
Given the 0.7% trend in real consumption growth over the past four and a half years, the US economy’s anemic 2.2% annualized recovery in the aftermath of the Great Recession is almost miraculous.
Credit that mainly to the other 30%, especially to strong exports and a rebound in business capital spending.
By contrast, the government sector has been moving in the opposite direction, as state and local governments retrench and federal purchases top out after post-crisis deficit explosions.
The housing sector has started to recover over the past five quarters, but from such a severely depressed level that its growth has had little impact on the overall economy.
Given the strong likelihood that consumers will remain weak for years to come, America’s growth agenda needs to focus on getting more out of the other 30%.
Of the four growth components that fall into this category, two have the greatest potential to make a difference – capital spending and exports.
Prospects for these two sources of growth will not only influence the vigor, or lack thereof, of any recovery; they could well be decisive in bringing about an important shift in the US growth model.
The 70/30 split underscores the challenge: the US must face up to a fundamental rebalancing – weaning itself from excessive reliance on internal demand and drawing greater support from external demand.
Capital spending and exports, which together account for about 24% of GDP, hold the key to this shift.
At just over 10% of GDP, the share of capital spending is well below the peak of nearly 13% in 2000.
But capital spending must exceed that peak if US businesses are to be equipped with state-of-the-art capacity, technology, and private infrastructure that will enable them to recapture market share at home and abroad.
Only then could export growth, impressive since mid-2009, sustain further increases.
And only then could the US stem the rising tide of import penetration by foreign producers.
The other 30% is also emblematic of a deeper strategic issue that America faces – a profound competitive challenge.
A shift to external demand is not there for the asking. It must be earned by hard work, sheer determination, and a long overdue competitive revival.
On that front, too, America has been falling behind.
According to the World Economic Forum’s Global Competitiveness Index, the US slipped to fifth place in 2011-2012, from fourth place the previous year, continuing a general downward trend evident since 2005.
The erosion is traceable to several factors, including deficiencies in primary and secondary education as well as poor macroeconomic management.
But the US also has disturbingly low rankings in the quality of its infrastructure (#24), technology availability and absorption (#18), and the sophistication and breadth of its supply-chain production processes (#14).
Improvement on all counts is vital for America’s competitive revival.
But meeting the challenge will require vigorous growth from America’s other 30% – especially private capital spending.
With the American consumer likely to remain on ice, the same 30% must also continue to shoulder the burden of a sluggish economic recovery.
None of this can occur in a vacuum.
The investment required for competitive revival and sustained recovery cannot be funded without a long-overdue improvement in US saving.
In an era of outsize government deficits and subpar household saving, that may be America’s toughest challenge of all.
America\u0027s Other 87 Deficits
NEW HAVEN – The United States has a classic multilateral trade imbalance.
While it runs a large trade deficit with China, it also runs deficits with 87 other countries.
A multilateral deficit cannot be fixed by putting pressure on one of its bilateral components.
But try telling that to America’s growing chorus of China bashers.
America’s massive trade deficit is a direct consequence of an unprecedented shortfall of domestic saving.
The broadest and most meaningful measure of a country’s saving capacity is what economists call the “net national saving rate” – the combined saving of individuals, businesses, and the government.
It is measured in “net” terms to strip out the depreciation associated with aging or obsolescent capacity.
It provides a measure of the saving that is available to fund expansion of a country’s capital stock, and thus to sustain its economic growth.
In the US, there simply is no net saving any more.
Since the fourth quarter of 2008, America’s net national saving rate has been negative – in sharp contrast to the 6.4%-of-GDP averaged over the last three decades of the twentieth century.
Never before in modern history has the world’s leading economic power experienced a saving shortfall of such epic proportions.
Yet the US found a way to finesse this problem.
Exploiting what&#160;Valéry Giscard d’Estaing called the “exorbitant privilege” of the world’s reserve currency, the US borrowed surplus savings from abroad on very attractive terms, running massive balance-of-payments, or current-account, deficits to attract foreign capital.
The US current account, which was last in balance in 1991, hit a record deficit of $801 billion (6% of GDP) in 2006.
This gap has narrowed in the past couple of years, but much of the improvement probably reflects little more than the temporary impact of an unusually tough business cycle.
This is where America’s multilateral trade deficit enters the equation, for it has long accounted for the bulk of America’s balance-of-payments gap.
Since 2000, it has made up fully 96% of the cumulative current-account shortfall.
And that is what ultimately makes the China-centric blame game so absurd.
Without addressing the root of the problem – America’s chronic saving shortfall – it is ludicrous to believe that there can be a bilateral solution for a multilateral problem.
Yet that is exactly what US officials, together with many prominent economists, believe America needs.
Since the trade deficit is widely thought to put pressure on US jobs and real wages, the US-China trade imbalance has come under special scrutiny in these days of great angst.
Yes, China does account for the largest component of America’s multilateral trade deficit – making up 42% of the total trade gap in 2010.
Conscious outsourcing and supply-chain management decisions by US multinationals play an important role in exaggerating China’s share.
But that does little to let China off the hook in the eyes of Washington.
Long-standing charges of currency manipulation provide the proverbial smoking gun that US politicians – of both parties –&#160;believe justifies the imposition of steep tariffs on China’s exports to the US (which totaled $365 billion in 2010).
That was precisely the argument behind the US Senate’s recent overwhelming approval of a “currency bill” that took dead aim on China.
While it may be convenient to hold others accountable for America’s problems, this is bad economics driving bad politics.
In an era of open-ended US government budget deficits and chronic shortfalls in personal saving, America is doomed to suffer subpar savings and massive multilateral trade deficits for as far as the eye can see.
In that vein, closing down trade with China, while failing to address the saving shortfall, is like putting pressure on one end of a water balloon.
The Chinese component of America’s multilateral trade deficit will simply migrate somewhere else – most likely to a higher-cost producer.
That would be the functional equivalent of a tax hike on beleaguered American families – hardly the solution that US politicians are promising.
This is not to ignore important US-China trade issues that need to be addressed.
Market access should be high on the agenda – especially for a sluggish US economy that needs new sources of growth, like exports.
With China now America’s third largest – and by far its most rapidly growing – export market, the US should push hard to expand business opportunities in China, especially as the Chinese economy tilts increasingly toward internal demand.
China should be viewed as an opportunity, not a threat.
At the same time, the US government should come clean with the American public about charges of Chinese currency manipulation and unfair trade practices.
The renminbi has, in fact, appreciated by 30% relative to the US dollar since mid-2005.
In broad multilateral terms – a far more meaningful gauge because it measures a currency’s value against a broad cross-section of a country’s trading partners – the “real effective” renminbi currently stands about 8% above its most recent 12-year average (1998-2010).
Yes, China continues to accumulate a vast fund of foreign-exchange reserves.
But this is as much the result of speculators’ “hot money” plays as it is a conscious and perfectly reasonable effort by Chinese policymakers to remain focused on financial stability and manage currency appreciation in a gradual, disciplined, and orderly fashion.
China-bashing in the US speaks to a corrosive shift in the American psyche.
It deflects attention away from those truly responsible for perpetuating the greatest saving shortfall in history.
Washington has been seduced by the political economy of false prosperity.
That seduction has encouraged America to squander its savings and live beyond its means for nearly two decades.
Now the game is up.
The ultimate test of any nation’s character is to look inside itself at moments of great challenge. Swept up in the blame game, the US is doing the opposite.
And that could well be the greatest tragedy of all.
After all, America’s 88 deficits did not arise of thin air.
The American Consumer is Not Okay
NEW HAVEN – The spin-doctors are hard at work talking up America’s subpar economic recovery.
All eyes are on households.
Thanks to falling unemployment, rising home values, and record stock prices, an emerging consensus of forecasters, market participants, and policymakers has now concluded that the American consumer is finally back.
Don’t believe it.
First, consider the facts: Over the 21 quarters since the beginning of 2008, real (inflation-adjusted) personal consumption has risen at an average annual rate of just 0.9%.
That is by far the most protracted period of weakness in real US consumer demand since the end of World War II – and a massive slowdown from the pre-crisis pace of 3.6% annual real consumption growth from 1996 to 2007.
With household consumption accounting for about 70% of the US economy, that 2.7-percentage-point gap between pre-crisis and post-crisis trends has been enough to knock 1.9 percentage points off the post-crisis trend in real GDP growth.
Look no further for the cause of unacceptably high US unemployment.
To appreciate fully the unique character of this consumer-demand shortfall, trends over the past 21 quarters need to be broken down into two distinct sub-periods.
First, there was a 2.2% annualized decline from the first quarter of 2008 through the second quarter of 2009.
This was crisis-driven carnage, highlighted by a 4.5% annualized collapse in the final two quarters of 2008.
Second, this six-quarter plunge was followed, from mid-2009 through early 2013, by 15 quarters of annualized consumption growth averaging just 2% – an upturn that pales in comparison with what would have been expected based on past consumer-spending cycles.
That key point appears all but lost on the consumer-recovery crowd.
In recent speeches and discussions with current and former central bankers, I have been criticized for focusing too much on the 0.9% trend of the past 21 quarters and paying too little attention to the 2% recovery phase of the post-crisis period.
At least it’s a recovery, they claim, and a sign of healing that can be attributed mainly to the heroic, unconventional efforts of the US Federal Reserve.
This brings us to the second part of the argument against optimism: analytics.
One of the first concepts to which an economics student is exposed in a basic macro course is “pent-up” consumer demand.
Discretionary consumption is typically deferred during recessions, especially for long-lasting durable goods such as motor vehicles, furniture, and appliances.
Once the recession ends and recovery begins, a “stock-adjustment” response takes hold, as households compensate for foregone replacement and update their aging durable goods.
Over most of the postwar period, this post-recession release of pent-up consumer demand has been a powerful source of support for economic recovery.
In the eight recoveries since the early 1950’s (excluding the brief pop following the credit-controls-induced slump in the 1980’s), the stock-adjustment response lifted real consumption growth by 6.1%, on average, for five quarters following business-cycle downturns; spurts of 7-8% growth were not uncommon for a quarter or two.
By contrast, the release of pent-up demand in the current cycle amounted to just 3% annualized growth in the five quarters from early 2010 to early 2011.
Moreover, the strongest quarterly gain was a 4.1% increase in the fourth quarter of 2010.
This is a stunning result.
The worst consumer recession in modern history, featuring a record collapse in durable-goods expenditures in 2008-2009, should have triggered an outsize surge of pent-up demand.
Yet it did anything but that.
Instead, the release of pent-up consumer demand was literally half that of previous business cycles.
The third point is more diagnostic: The shockingly anemic pattern of post-crisis US consumer demand has resulted from a deep Japan-like balance-sheet recession.
With the benefit of hindsight, we now know that the 12-year pre-crisis US consumer-spending binge was built on a precarious foundation of asset and credit bubbles.
When those bubbles burst, consumers were left with a massive overhang of excess debt and subpar saving.
The post-bubble aversion to spending, and the related focus on balance-sheet repair, reflects what Nomura Research Institute economist Richard Koo has called a powerful “debt rejection” syndrome.
While Koo applied this framework to Japanese firms in Japan’s first lost decade of the 1990’s, it rings true for America’s crisis-battered consumers, who are still struggling with the lingering pressures of excessive debt loads, underwater mortgages, and woefully inadequate personal saving.
Through its unconventional monetary easing, the Fed is attempting to create a shortcut around the imperative of household sector balance-sheet repair.
This is where the wealth effects of now-rebounding housing prices and a surging stock market come into play.
But are these newfound wealth effects really all that they are made out to be?
Yes, the stock market is now at an all-time high – but only in current dollars.
In real terms, the S&amp;P 500 is still 20% below its January 2000 peak.
Similarly, while the Case-Shiller index of US home prices is now up 10.2% over the year ending March 2013, it remains 28% below its 2006 peak.
Wealth creation matters, but not until it recoups the wealth destruction that preceded it.
Sadly, most American households are still far from recovery on the asset side of their balance sheets.
Moreover, though the US unemployment rate has fallen, this largely reflects an alarming decline in labor-force participation, with more than 6.5 million Americans since 2006 having given up looking for work.
At the same time, while consumer confidence is on the mend, it remains well below pre-crisis readings.
In short, the American consumer’s nightmare is far from over.
Spin and frothy markets aside, the healing has only just begun.
America’s Political Recession
BERKELEY – The odds are now about 36% that the United States will be in a recession next year.
The reason is entirely political: partisan polarization has reached levels never before seen, threatening to send the US economy tumbling over the “fiscal cliff” – the automatic tax increases and spending cuts that will take effect at the beginning of 2013 unless Democrats and Republicans agree otherwise.
More than a century ago, during the first Gilded Age, American politics was sharply polarized as well.
In 1896, future President Theodore Roosevelt was a Republican attack dog.
He denounced Democratic presidential candidate William Jennings Bryan as a mere puppet of the sinister governor of Illinois, John Peter Altgeld.
Bryan, Roosevelt said, “would be as clay in the hands of the potter under the astute control of the ambitious and unscrupulous Illinois communist.”
The “free coinage of silver” would be “but a step towards the general socialism which is the fundamental doctrine of his political belief.”
He and Altgeld “seek to overturn the...essential policies which have controlled the government since its foundation.”
Such language is as extreme as any we hear today – and from a man who was shortly to become Vice President (and later President, following the assassination of William McKinley).
We have heard Texas Governor Rick Perry call obliquely for the lynching of his fellow Republican, Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke, should he come to the Lone Star State.
And we have seen Kansas Secretary of State Kris Kobach explore the possibility of removing President Barack Obama from the ballot in Kansas, because, Kobach suggested, Obama is “not a natural-born citizen.”
But neither Perry nor Kobach is likely ever to be a US president, whereas Theodore Roosevelt was more than a partisan.
He was happy to make deals with Democrats – to put himself at the head not just of the Republican Party but of the bipartisan Progressive coalition, trying either to yoke the two forces together or to tack back and forth between them to achieve legislative and policy goals.
Obama broadly follows Ronald Reagan’s (second-term) security policy, George H.W. Bush’s spending policy, Bill Clinton’s tax policy, the bipartisan Squam Lake Group’s financial-regulatory policy, Perry’s immigration policy, John McCain’s climate-change policy, and Mitt Romney’s health-care policy (at least when Romney was governor of Massachusetts).
And yet he has gotten next to no Republicans to support their own policies.
Indeed, like Clinton before him, Obama has been unable to get Republican senators like Susan Collins to vote for her own campaign-finance policies, McCain to vote for his own climate-change policy, and – most laughably – Romney to support his own health-care plan.
Likewise, he has been unable to get Republican Vice-Presidential candidate Paul Ryan to endorse his own Medicare cost-control proposals.
There are obvious reasons for this.
A large chunk of the Republican base, including many of the party’s largest donors, believes that any Democratic president is an illegitimate enemy of America, so that whatever such an incumbent proposes must be wrong and thus should be thwarted.
And the Republican cadres believe this of Obama even more than they believed it of Clinton.
This view clearly influences Republican office-holders, who fear the partisan beast that mans their campaigns’ phone banks and holds the purse strings.
Moreover, ever since Clinton’s election in 1992, those at the head of the Republican Party have believed that creating gridlock whenever a Democrat is in the White House, and thus demonstrating the government’s incapacity to act, is their best path to electoral success.
That was the Republicans’ calculation in 2011-2012.
And November’s election did not change the balance of power anywhere in the American government: Obama remains President, the Republicans remain in control of the House of Representatives, and the Democrats control the Senate.
Now, it is possible that Republican legislators may rebel against their leaders, arguing that they ran for office to govern, not to paralyze the government in the hope that doing so will give the party power to reign as it wishes after the next election.
It is possible that Republican leaders like Representatives John Boehner and Eric Cantor and Senator Mitch McConnell will conclude that their policy of obstruction has been a failure.
They might note that, although the economy remains deeply troubled and depressed in the aftermath of a financial crisis for which they set the stage, Obama’s policies have been by far the most successful of those in any major advanced country, and conclude that he has been a relatively good president, and one worth supporting.
But don’t count on it.
Right now, every senior politician in America is telling their favorites in the press that they are confident that compromise on the “fiscal cliff” will be reached before the end of December.
But they are telling their favorites this because they think that pessimism now will lead to their being blamed for gridlock later.
It seems to me that the odds are around 60% that real negotiation will not begin until tax rates go up on January 1.
And it seems to me that, if gridlock continues into 2013, the odds are 60% that it will tip the US back into recession.
Let us hope that it will be short and shallow.
Bye-Bye, Middle East?
PARIS – For some time now, a certain strategic vision has been gaining traction: the United States is becoming energy-independent, paving the way for its political retreat from the Middle East and justifying its strategic “pivot” toward Asia.
This view seems intuitively correct, but is it?
Energy-hungry America has long depended on the global market to meet domestic demand.
In 2005, the US imported 60% of the energy that it consumed.
Since then, however, the share of imports has decreased, and it should continue to do so.
The US is expected to become energy self-sufficient in 2020, and to become an oil exporter by 2030.
This scenario would grant the US three enormous advantages.
It would enhance US economic competitiveness, especially relative to Europe, given the lower costs involved in the extraction of shale gas.
It would also reduce America’s exposure to growing unrest in the Arab world.
Finally, it would increase the relative vulnerability of America’s main strategic rival, China, which is becoming increasingly dependent on Middle East energy supplies.
These facts obviously need to be taken seriously, but their implications for US foreign policy in the Middle East should not be too hastily drawn.
Above all, though energy dependence is a key element of US policy in the region, it is far from being the only factor.
Israel’s security and the desire to contain Iran are equally important.
Moreover, the Middle East’s role in the global geopolitics of energy will grow in the coming decades, making it difficult to see how a superpower like the US could simply walk away from the region.
Within the next 15 years, OPEC countries will account for 50% of global oil production, compared to only 42% today.
Furthermore, the country on which this increase will most likely hinge is Iraq.
Could the US ignore a country that in roughly ten years will become the world’s second-largest oil exporter, generating more than $200 billion annually in revenue, while increasingly being dominated by an authoritarian Shia regime that is close to Iran?
Would it withdraw in the face of the consequent strategic threat to its three allies – Saudi Arabia, Turkey, and Israel – in the region?
Such a possibility seems even more far-fetched as long as the Iranian nuclear crisis remains unresolved and the Syrian crisis continues to widen the region’s Shia-Sunni divide (reflected in increased tension between Turkey and Iran).
Even as US President Barack Obama was visiting Asia in November – a trip meant to underscore America’s “pivot” – he was forced to devote considerable time and attention to mediating a cease-fire between Israel and Hamas in Gaza.
Indeed, if oil were truly America’s only or paramount interest in the Middle East, its special relationship with Israel would be mystifying, given the harm that it implies for US interests among Arab oil exporters.
Even when its energy dependence on the Middle East was at its peak, the US rarely altered its policy of support for Israel.
It is also important to bear in mind that in 1973, the US suffered less from the OPEC oil embargo than Europe did, even though America, which had resupplied Israel in its war with Egypt and Syria in October of that year, was the primary target.
In the end, America’s position in the region strengthened after Egypt became a US ally and made peace with Israel.
China’s growing interest in the Middle East also decreases the likelihood of an American withdrawal.
The US will remain concerned about ensuring the security of energy supplies for its Asian allies, which, like China, are increasingly dependent on the region’s oil exporters.
Nevertheless, while an American withdrawal from the Middle East seems highly unlikely, US exposure to the region will indeed decline; as that happens, America’s role there will probably become more subdued – and perhaps more cynical.
Its involvement in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict will likely be limited to maintaining the status quo rather than seeking a comprehensive settlement.
This stance – suggested by America’s opposition to granting Palestine observer-state status at the United Nations – would amount to an admission by the US that it has given up on the creation of two states in the Middle East.
That would certainly satisfy Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu and the Palestinian fringe seeking to weaken the Palestinian Authority.
But it would fully vindicate those who believe that Obama is more a man of good will than a visionary.
America’s Perpetual Christmas
Has the United States transcended the laws of economics?
As the New Year begins, the US continues to race ahead of its rich-country counterparts.
The gargantuan US trade deficit?
No problem.
In 2005, it widened further, and the dollar only strengthened.
Low investment and a deteriorating primary education system?
Not to worry.
The super-flexible US economy keeps managing to produce more with less.
Nor are there any signs of America’s economic hegemony starting to fold under the weight of maintaining its unilateral military dominance.
Instead of feeling the pinch of wartime privations, like in any ordinary country, American consumers are binging as if it were Christmas all year round.
There are those who truly believe in the idea that America is exceptional.
Those true believers argue that America’s consumers can long pursue their spendthrift ways because their country’s economy is better than everyone else’s.
The US labor market is more flexible than Europe’s, enabling it to react more nimbly to the ever shifting sands of globalization.
And, unlike most countries, especially in Latin America and Asia, the US system ruthlessly prunes weak corporate leadership.
Moreover, the true believers cite America’s better-funded and hyper-competitive university system, which sucks in a disproportionate share of the world’s top students and researchers.
Many ultimately choose to immigrate to America permanently, and it is relatively easy for them to do so, thanks to a society that still welcomes outsiders with open arms (even if things have become more difficult since 2001).
On top of all this, the US military, rather than being a burden, feeds the country’s technological superiority by subsidizing basic research.
By contrast, skeptics hold that the US economy already contains the seeds of its own socio-economic decline.
They point to worsening income inequality, as images beamed worldwide from post-hurricane New Orleans illustrated all too clearly.
Poor children do not have reasonable access to health care.
Nor are the non-poor faring particularly well, as wage growth has remained virtually flat for a very long time, even as corporate profits are booming.
Indeed, this disconnect may explain why polls do not give President Bush the credit for economic management that his strong record would seem to merit. Nor does it help Americans’ mood that they spend far more of their lives working than do citizens in Europe or, these days, even Japan.
All of these factors place deep stresses on the social fabric which, so the skeptics argue, will ultimately play out in the political arena.
Interestingly, both sides cite America’s gaping trade deficit – believe it or not, the US is soaking up two-thirds of global excess saving – to support their arguments.
The true believers view the deficits as evidence that the world recognizes how special the US is and wants to buy in. Skeptics see an empire living on borrowed money and borrowed time.
So which is it?
In my view, those who think that America is about to collapse are likely to be disappointed.
Nevertheless, I suspect that the age of American exceptionalism is near an end, and soon per capita income in Europe and Japan will approach that of the US, rather than falling farther behind.
Though the next few years are likely to underscore some of the weaknesses that the skeptics highlight, the end will come mainly because other countries will find creative ways to mimic the most effective US institutions, albeit within their own legal, political, and social frameworks.
We would do well to recall how, at the beginning of the 1990’s, book after book was still being written urging US and European corporations to imitate Japan or face certain doom.
The last 15 years have of course revealed deep flaws in Japan’s financial system.
But another major factor contributing to Japan’s decline was that firms elsewhere began adopting Japanese methods, such as just-in-time supply chains.
Surely, imitation will someday impinge on superior US growth performance as well.
Perhaps the biggest weakness in the true believers’ argument is the trade deficit.
For the moment, America’s ability to borrow vast sums at low interest rates acts like a huge dose of steroids on the economy. It artificially props up consumption growth and allows the government to defer hard choices between taxes and military expenditures.
At some point, the party is going to end.
The unwinding of the US economy might even begin in 2006, particularly if Japan continues to grow out of its doldrums, the US housing market softens dramatically, and Europe’s economic recovery accelerates.
Individually, these are each highly plausible scenarios, and collectively they would hit the US trade deficit like a perfect storm.
Perhaps the end will come in a different way, but it is difficult to imagine the age of US exceptionalism lasting indefinitely.
Can the end come abruptly in 2006?
This is not the most likely scenario, but it is not unthinkable.
America’s Strategy Vacuum
NEW HAVEN – Apparently, policymakers at the Federal Reserve are having second thoughts about the wisdom of open-ended quantitative easing (QE).
They should.
Not only has this untested policy experiment failed to deliver an acceptable economic recovery; it has also heightened the risk of another crisis.
The minutes of the January 29-30 meeting of the Fed’s Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) speak to a simmering discontent: “[M]any participants…expressed some concerns about potential costs and risks arising from further asset purchases.”
The concerns range from worries about the destabilizing ramifications of an exit strategy from QE to apprehension about capital losses on the Fed’s rapidly ballooning portfolio of securities (currently $3 trillion, and on its way to $4 trillion by the end of this year).
As serious as these concerns may be, they overlook what could well be the greatest flaw in the Fed’s unprecedented gambit: an emphasis on short-term tactics over longer-term strategy.
Blindsided by the crisis of 2007-2008, the Fed has compounded its original misdiagnosis of the problem by repeatedly doubling down on tactical responses, with two rounds of QE preceding the current, open-ended iteration.
The FOMC, drawing a false sense of comfort from the success of QE1 – a massive liquidity injection in the depths of a horrific crisis – mistakenly came to believe that it had found the right template for subsequent policy actions.
That approach might have worked had the US economy been afflicted by a cyclical disease – a temporary shortfall of aggregate demand.
In that case, countercyclical policies – both fiscal and monetary – could eventually be expected to plug the demand hole and get the economy going again, just as Keynesians argue.
But the US is not suffering from a temporary, cyclical malady. It is afflicted by a very different disease: a protracted balance-sheet recession that continues to hobble American households, whose consumption accounts for roughly 70% of GDP.
Gains in inflation-adjusted personal-consumption expenditure have averaged a mere 0.8% over the past five years – the most severe and protracted slowdown in consumer demand growth in the post-World War II era.
The brute force of massive monetary and fiscal stimulus rings hollow as a cyclical remedy to this problem.
Another approach is needed.
The focus, instead, should be on accelerating the process of balance-sheet repair, while at the same time returning monetary and fiscal policy levers to more normal settings.
Forgiveness of “underwater” mortgages (where the outstanding loan exceeds the home’s current market value), as well as reducing the foreclosure overhang of some 1.5 million homes, must be part of that solution.
How else can the crisis-battered housing market finally clear for the remainder of US homeowners?
The same can be said for enhanced saving incentives, which would contribute to longer-term financial security for American households, most of which suffered massive wealth losses in the Great Recession.
Expanded individual retirement accounts and 401K pension schemes, special incentives for low-income households (most of which have no retirement plans), and an end to the financial repression that the Fed’s zero-interest-rate policy imposes on savers must also be part of the solution.
Yes, these are controversial policies.
Debt forgiveness raises thorny ethical concerns about condoning reckless and irresponsible behavior.
But converting underwater “non-recourse” mortgage loans, where only the house is at risk, into so-called “recourse liabilities,” for which nonpayment would have consequences for all of a borrower’s assets, could address this concern, while simultaneously tempering America’s culture of leverage with a much greater sense of responsibility.
Timing is also an issue, especially with respect to saving incentives.
To avoid the shortfall in aggregate demand that might arise from an abrupt surge in saving, these measures should be phased in over a period of 3-5 years.
The main benefit of these proposals is that they are more strategic than tactical – better aligned with the balance-sheet problems that are actually afflicting the economy.
As the quintessential laissez-faire system, the US has outsourced strategy to the invisible hand of the market for far too long.
That has left the government locked into a reactive and often misguided approach to unexpected problems.
Thus, the Fed is focused on cleaning up after a crisis rather than on how to avoid another one.
The same is true of US fiscal policy, with an event-driven debate that now has ever-shorter time horizons: the fiscal cliff on January 1, sequestration of expenditures on March 1, expiration of the continuing budget resolution on March 27, and the new May 18 debt-ceiling limit.
A compliant bond market, which may well be the next bubble, is mistakenly viewed as the ultimate validation of this myopic approach.
The dangers of America’s strategy vacuum and the related penchant for short-termism have been mounting for some time.
Harvard Business School professor Michael Porter famously raised this concern in a 1996 article in the Harvard Business Review.
His focus was on corporate decision-making and misaligned incentives leading to a worrisome dichotomy between the short-term tactics of “operational effectiveness” (cost cutting, outsourcing, and reengineering) and the long-term visionary bets that frame successful strategies.
While Porter’s critique was directed at business managers, it bears critically on the current US policy debate.
A successful long-term strategy cannot be seen as a succession of short-term fixes.
The internal debate in the FOMC represents a healthy and long-overdue recognition that the central bank may be digging itself into an ever-deeper hole by committing to misguided policies aimed at the wrong problem.
A comparable debate is raging over fiscal policy.
Can America finally face up to the perils of its strategy vacuum?
America’s Political Class Struggle
NEW YORK – America is on a collision course with itself.
This month’s deal between President Barack Obama and the Republicans in Congress to extend the tax cuts initiated a decade ago by President George W. Bush is being hailed as the start of a new bipartisan consensus. I believe, instead, that it is a false truce in what will become a pitched battle for the soul of American politics.
As in many countries, conflicts over public morality and national strategy come down to questions of money. In the United States, this is truer than ever.
The US is running an annual budget deficit of around $1 trillion, which may widen further as a result of the new tax agreement.
This level of annual borrowing is far too high for comfort. It must be cut, but how?
The problem is America’s corrupted politics and loss of civic morality.
One political party, the Republicans, stands for little except tax cuts, which they place above any other goal.
The Democrats have a bit wider set of interests, including support for health care, education, training, and infrastructure.
But, like the Republicans, the Democrats, too, are keen to shower tax cuts on their major campaign contributors, predominantly rich Americans.
The result is a dangerous paradox.
The US budget deficit is enormous and unsustainable.
The poor are squeezed by cuts in social programs and a weak job market.
One in eight Americans depends on Food Stamps to eat.
Yet, despite these circumstances, one political party wants to gut tax revenues altogether, and the other is easily dragged along, against its better instincts, out of concern for keeping its rich contributors happy.
This tax-cutting frenzy comes, incredibly, after three decades of elite fiscal rule in the US that has favored the rich and powerful.
Since Ronald Reagan became President in 1981, America’s budget system has been geared to supporting the accumulation of vast wealth at the top of the income distribution.
Amazingly, the richest 1% of American households now has a higher net worth than the bottom 90%.
The annual income of the richest 12,000 households is greater than that of the poorest 24 million households.
The Republican Party’s real game is to try to lock that income and wealth advantage into place.
They fear, rightly, that sooner or later everyone else will begin demanding that the budget deficit be closed in part by raising taxes on the rich.
After all, the rich are living better than ever, while the rest of American society is suffering.
It makes sense to tax them more.
The Republicans are out to prevent that by any means.
This month, they succeeded, at least for now.
But they want to follow up their tactical victory – which postpones the restoration of pre-Bush tax rates for a couple of years – with a longer-term victory next spring.
Their leaders in Congress are already declaring that they will slash public spending in order to begin reducing the deficit.
Ironically, there is one area in which large budget cuts are certainly warranted: the military.
But that is the one item most Republicans won’t touch.
They want to slash the budget not by ending the useless war in Afghanistan, and by eliminating unnecessary weapons systems, but by cutting education, health, and other benefits for the poor and working class.
In the end, I don’t think they will succeed.
For the moment, most Americans seem to be going along with Republican arguments that it is better to close the budget deficit through spending cuts rather than tax increases.
Yet when the actual budget proposals are made, there will be a growing backlash.
With their backs against the wall, I predict, poor and working-class Americans will begin to agitate for social justice.
This may take time.
The level of political corruption in America is staggering.
Everything now is about money to run electoral campaigns, which have become incredibly expensive.
The mid-term elections cost an estimated $4.5 billion, with most of the contributions coming from big corporations and rich contributors.
These powerful forces, many of which operate anonymously under US law, are working relentlessly to defend those at the top of the income distribution.
But make no mistake: both parties are implicated.
There is already talk that Obama will raise $1 billion or more for his re-election campaign.
That sum will not come from the poor.
The problem for the rich is that, other than military spending, there is no place to cut the budget other than in areas of core support for the poor and working class.
Is America really going to cut health benefits and retirement income?  Will it really balance the budget by slashing education spending at a time when US students already are being out-performed by their Asian counterparts?
Will America really let its public infrastructure continue to deteriorate?
The rich will try to push such an agenda, but ultimately they will fail.
Obama swept to power on the promise of change.
So far there has been none.
His administration is filled with Wall Street bankers.
His top officials leave to join the banks, as his budget director Peter Orszag recently did.
He is always ready to serve the interests of the rich and powerful, with no line in the sand, no limit to “compromise.”
If this continues, a third party will emerge, committed to cleaning up American politics and restoring a measure of decency and fairness.
This, too, will take time.
The political system is deeply skewed against challenges to the two incumbent parties.
Yet the time for change will come.
The Republicans believe that they have the upper hand and can pervert the system further in favor of the rich. I believe that they will be proved wrong.
America\u0027s Problems Run Deeper than Wall Street
CAMBRIDGE – With less than two months remaining before America’s presidential election, much attention is focused on the state of the American economy and the challenges that it will present to the next president.
We are in the midst of a financial crisis caused by the serious mispricing of all kinds of risks and by the collapse of the housing bubble that developed in the first half of this decade.
What started as a problem with sub-prime mortgages has now spread to houses more generally, as well as to other asset classes.
The housing problem is contributing to the financial crisis, which in turn is reducing the supply of credit needed to sustain economic activity.          
Indeed, the financial crisis has worsened in recent weeks, reflected in the US Federal Reserve’s takeover of quasi-government mortgage lenders Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac – which may cost American taxpayers hundreds of billions of dollars – as well as the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers and the sale of Merrill Lynch.
Ultimately, these financial failures reflect the downward spiral of house prices and the increasing number of homes with negative equity, i.e., with substantial mortgage debt in excess of market values.
Negative equity is significant because mortgages in the United States are generally “no recourse” loans.
If a homeowner defaults, creditors can take the house, but they cannot take other property or income to make up any unpaid balance.
Even in those states where mortgages are not “no recourse” loans, creditors generally do not pursue the assets or income of individuals who default.
We cannot be sure about how much further house prices will fall.
Experts say another 15% decline is required just to return to the pre-bubble price path.
But there is nothing to stop the decline from continuing once it reaches that point.
The growing gap between mortgage debts and house prices will continue to increase the rate of defaults.
Many homeowners who can afford to make their mortgage payments will choose to default, move to rental housing, and wait to purchase until house prices have declined further.
As homeowners with large negative equity default, the foreclosed homes contribute to the excess supply that drives prices down further.
And the lower prices lead to more negative equity and therefore to more defaults and foreclosures.
It is not clear what will stop this self-reinforcing process.
Declining house prices are key to the financial crisis and the outlook for the economy, because mortgage-backed securities, and the derivatives based on them, are the primary assets that are weakening financial institutions.
Until house prices stabilize, these securities cannot be valued with any confidence.
And that means that the financial institutions that own them cannot have confidence in the liquidity or solvency of potential counterparties – or even in the value of their own capital.
Without this confidence, credit will not flow and economic activity will be constrained.
Moreover, because financial institutions’ assets were bought mainly with borrowed money, the shortage of credit is exacerbated by their need to deleverage.
Since raising capital is difficult and costly, they deleverage by lending less.
But the macroeconomic weakness in the US now goes beyond the decreased supply of credit.  Falling house prices reduce household wealth and therefore consumer spending.
Falling employment lowers wage and salary incomes.
The higher prices of food and energy depress real incomes further.
And declining economic activity in the rest of the world is lowering demand for US exports.
The US Federal Reserve has, in my judgment, responded appropriately by reducing the federal funds interest rate sharply and creating a variety of new credit facilities.
The low interest rate helped by making the dollar more competitive, but otherwise monetary policy appears to have lost traction because of the condition of the housing sector and the dysfunctional state of the credit markets.
The US Congress and the Bush administration enacted a $100 billion tax rebate in an attempt to stimulate consumer spending.
Those of us who supported this policy generally knew that history and economic theory implied that such one-time fiscal transfers have little effect, but we thought that this time might be different.
Our support was, in the words of Samuel Johnson, a triumph of hope over experience.
In the end, our hopes were frustrated.
The official national income accounting data for the second quarter are now available, and they show that the rebates did very little to stimulate spending.
More than 80% of the rebate dollars were saved or used to pay down debt.
Very little was added to current spending.
So that is where the US is now: in the middle of a financial crisis, with the economy sliding into recession, monetary policy already at maximum easing, and fiscal transfers impotent.
That is an unenviable situation, to say the least, for any incoming president.
Obama’s Burmese Gamble
ARLINGTON – The rapprochement between the United States and Myanmar (Burma) has proceeded at a blistering pace.
A year ago, the two countries did not even have ambassadors in each other’s capitals.
In May, President Thein Sein became the first leader from Myanmar to visit the White House in nearly a half-century.
But has Barack Obama’s administration been too quick to embrace what was, until recently, one of the world’s most repressive regimes?
Or, on the contrary, is decisive US support essential to Myanmar’s fledgling reform process?
Until the recent opening, Myanmar, which gained independence in 1948, had been ruled by a secretive military junta since 1962.
As recently as 2010, the regime held elections so blatantly rigged that the main opposition party refused to participate.
But in 2011, shortly before assuming the presidency, Sein, a general who served as Prime Minister under the junta, began to take steps that impressed even the most skeptical observers.
Unlike the token gestures of reform offered by previous rulers, Sein’s actions appeared substantive and meaningful.
One important change was the release of hundreds of political prisoners, including the regime’s most prominent opponent, Aung San Suu Kyi, who had been under house arrest for nearly 15 years.
Moreover, Sein initiated a dialogue with Suu Kyi, a Nobel Peace Prize winner and the leader of the National League for Democracy (NLD), about a transition to civilian rule.
The subsequent elections bolstered hope for Myanmar’s democratic future.
In 1990, when the NLD won 81% of the seats in Parliament, the junta promptly voided the results and arrested Suu Kyi.
In 2012, the NLD won 43 of the 44 seats that it contested, and the military accepted Suu Kyi as the reform movement’s legitimate leader.
Furthermore, Sein has reached out to the Karen, Kachin, and other ethnic minorities – groups whose members have suffered decades of official persecution and mistreatment.
And efforts to open Myanmar’s economy to international trade have transformed the country’s commercial capital, Yangon (Rangoon), with businesspeople now arriving on direct flights from at least a half-dozen foreign capitals and once-empty streets now congested with imported cars.
But, in some areas, reform has been painfully slow.
In fact, when it comes to human rights and minority protections, Myanmar may even be regressing.
The liberalization process has exposed the country’s long-standing religious divisions, leading to a wave of sectarian violence aimed primarily at the minority Muslim community.
From coastal Rakhine to inland towns like Meiktila and Tatkon, Buddhist monks have incited violence against Muslims (and sometimes vice versa), with local officials often tacitly permitting religious bloodletting.
At his meeting with Sein in Washington, DC, Obama condemned the violence against Myanmar’s Muslims, which has displaced many of them.
On the same day, the US State Department released its annual report on religious freedom, in which Myanmar was included among the world’s eight worst offenders.
This has not always been the case.
Although Myanmar is an overwhelmingly Buddhist country, dozens of religious and ethnic communities have long lived there side by side.
In the heart of Yangon, the golden dome of the Sule Pagoda stands just across the street from the minarets of the Bengali Mosque.
In order to achieve the peace and stability needed to consolidate Myanmar’s democratic transition, both Sein and Suu Kyi should do more to establish themselves as representatives of all of Myanmar’s citizens.
Muslims need to be assured of their personal security and guaranteed full civil rights.
The Obama administration has staked significant political capital on the wager that Myanmar’s promise may finally bear fruit.
And, indeed, the rate of change in Myanmar over the last two years has been nothing short of remarkable.
But, as Sein acknowledged at the White House, Myanmar’s government “has been encountering obstacles and challenges along [its] democratization process.”
How it copes with these problems – and those that have yet to arise – will determine whether America has given its blessing prematurely.
America\u0027s Renminbi Fixation
NEW YORK – For seven years, the United States has allowed its fixation on the renminbi’s exchange rate to deflect attention from far more important issues in its economic relationship with China.
The upcoming Strategic and Economic Dialogue between the US and China is an excellent opportunity to examine – and rethink – America’s priorities.
Since 2005, the US Congress has repeatedly flirted with legislation aimed at defending hard-pressed American workers from the presumed threat of a cheap Chinese currency.
Bipartisan support for such a measure surfaced when Senators Charles Schumer (a liberal Democrat from New York) and Lindsey Graham (a conservative Republican from South Carolina) introduced the first Chinese currency bill.
The argument for legislative action is tantalizingly simple: the US merchandise trade deficit has averaged a record 4.4% of GDP since 2005, with China accounting for fully 35% of the shortfall, supposedly owing to its currency manipulation.
The Chinese, insists a broad coalition of politicians, business leaders, and academic economists, must revalue or face sanctions.
This reasoning resonates with the US public.
Opinion polls conducted in 2011 found that fully 61% of Americans believes that China represents a serious economic threat.
As such, the currency debate looms as a major issue in the upcoming US presidential campaign.
“Enough is enough,” President Barack Obama replied, when queried on the renminbi in the aftermath of his last meeting with Chinese President Hu Jintao.
Obama’s presumptive Republican challenger, Mitt Romney, has promised to declare China guilty of currency manipulation the day he takes office.
But, however appealing this logic may be, it is wrong.
First, America’s trade deficit is multilateral: the US ran deficits with 88 nations in 2010.
A multilateral imbalance – especially one that it is traceable to a saving shortfall – cannot be fixed by putting pressure on a bilateral exchange rate.
Indeed, America’s major threat is from within.
Blaming China merely impedes the heavy lifting that must be done at home – namely, boosting saving by cutting budget deficits and encouraging households to save income rather than rely on asset bubbles.
Second, the renminbi has now appreciated 31.4% against the dollar since mid-2005, well in excess of the 27.5% increase called for by the original Schumer-Graham bill.
Mindful of the lessons of Japan – especially its disastrous concession on sharp yen appreciation in the Plaza Accord of 1985 – the Chinese have opted, instead, for a gradual revaluation.
Recent moves toward renminbi internationalization, a more open capital account, and wider currency trading bands leave little doubt that the endgame is a market-based, fully convertible renminbi.
Third, there has been significant improvement in China’s external imbalance.
The International Monetary Fund estimates that China’s current-account surplus will narrow to just 2.3% of GDP in 2012, after peaking at 10.1% in 2007.
American officials have long bemoaned China’s saving glut as a major source of global instability.
But they should look in the mirror: America’s current-account deficit this year, at an estimated $510 billion, is likely to be 2.8 times higher than China’s surplus.
Finally, China has evolved from the world’s factory to its assembly line.
Research shows that no more than 20% to 30% of Chinese exports to the US reflect value added inside China.
Roughly 60% of Chinese exports represent shipments of “foreign invested enterprises” – in effect, Chinese subsidiaries of global multinationals.
Think Apple.
Globalized production platforms distort bilateral trade data between the US and China, and have little to do with the exchange rate.
Rather than vilifying China as the principal economic threat to America, the relationship should be recast as an opportunity.
The largest component of US aggregate demand – the consumer – is on ice.
With households focused on repairing severely damaged balance sheets, inflation-adjusted private consumption has expanded at an anemic 0.5% average annual rate over the past four years.
Consumer deleveraging is likely to persist for years to come, leaving the US increasingly desperate for new sources of growth.
Exports top the list of possibilities.
China is now America’s third largest and most rapidly growing export market.
There can be no mistaking its potential to fill some of the void left by US consumers.
The key to realizing that opportunity lies in access to Chinese markets – all the more significant in light of China’s upcoming pro-consumption rebalancing.
Historically, China has had an open development model, with imports running at 28% of GDP since 2002 – nearly three times Japan’s 10% import ratio during its high-growth era (1960-1989).
As a result, for a given increment of domestic demand, China is far more predisposed toward foreign sourcing.
As the Chinese consumer emerges, demand for a wide variety of US-made goods – ranging from new-generation information technology and biotech to automotive components and aircraft – could surge.
The same is true of services.
At just 43% of GDP, China’s services sector is relatively tiny.
There is enormous scope for America’s global services companies to expand in China, especially in transactions-intensive distribution sectors – wholesale and retail trade, domestic transportation, and supply-chain logistics – as well as in the processing segments of finance, health care, and data warehousing.
The US needs to refocus the US-China trade agenda toward expanded market access in these and other areas – pushing back against Chinese policies and government procurement practices that favor domestic production and indigenous innovation.
Some progress has been made, but more is needed – for example, getting China to join the World Trade Organization’s Government Procurement Agreement.
At the same time, the US should reconsider antiquated Cold War restrictions on Chinese purchases of technology-intensive items.
For a growth-starved US, the opportunities of market access far outweigh the currency threat.
The long-dormant Chinese consumer is about to be unleashed.
This plays to one of America’s greatest strengths – its zeal to compete in new markets.
Shame on the US if it squanders this extraordinary chance by digging in its heels at the upcoming Strategic and Economic dialogue.
America\u0027s Retreat from Asia
The United States' planned withdrawal of troops from Asia, which President George W. Bush announced on August 16, need not harm peace and stability in the region and particularly in Korea.
But a key condition for a smooth redeployment of US troops is close consultations by America with its allies, something it has not done well up to now.
South Korea and Japan need to have their views taken into serious account if this now inevitable withdrawal is to succeed.
By contrast, unilaterally announcing the withdrawal - and then unilaterally implementing it - may harm the very purpose that the remaining US troops in Asia are intended to serve: assuring deterrence, stability, and nonproliferation in Korea and Asia.
The withdrawal plan is causing countless worries.
In Japan, there are concerns that it will make the country America's frontline command post in Asia, possibly beyond the scope of its bilateral security treaty with the US.
One result is that China feels nervous about the implications of any expansion of the American-Japanese military partnership.
But the impact of America's planned troop withdrawals is felt most keenly in South Korea.
In June, the Bush administration revealed its plan to withdraw some 12,500 of the 37,000 US soldiers stationed in South Korea by the end of 2005. These include 3,600 troops from the 2nd Brigade of the 2nd Infantry Division, who are already earmarked for redeployment in Iraq.
The US Defense Department justifies this change as part of the so-called "Global Posture Review" that it has been carrying out to provide more flexibility and mobility in deploying troops to more urgently needed places around the world.
But the unilateral nature of the announcement, and the abrupt timing of the plan, has incited alarm in South Korea, and perhaps in Japan, that withdrawal could pose serious risks to the vital role that US forces have performed in deterring another war in Korea.
South Koreans genuinely fear that the plan may weaken deterrence by sending North Korea - which is demanding a US military withdrawal while refusing to abandon its nuclear weapons ambitions - the message that intransigence pays.
Indeed, it should not be forgotten that North Korea maintains an army of 1.1 million troops.
Moreover, the manner in which the Bush administration unveiled its withdrawal plan has weakened the credibility of the US-Korean alliance.
America's unilateral announcement has fuelled rumors to the effect that withdrawal must have something to do with the rising tide of anti-Americanism in South Korea, and especially with the country's reluctance and delay in dispatching an additional 3,600 of its own soldiers to Iraq.
The Bush administration tries to rebut these charges by saying that the plan will not weaken the deterrence capabilities of American forces, for America's far more powerful air and naval presence in the area will be maintained.
Moreover, the US plans to strengthen South Korea's own forces by supplying some $11 billion worth of high-technology equipment over the next five years.
Militarily, this argument does make sense.
Politically and psychologically, however, the method, let alone the timing and implementation of the withdrawals, raises many questions about the ongoing viability of the US-Korean security alliance, for the alliance now seems adrift, without a common purpose and with little direction from either side.
Yet the Bush administration insists: "The US views South Korea as a strong and steadfast ally. We are committed to South Korea's security and to our alliance and partnership with Seoul."
If Washington is serious about these words, it should transform this commitment into a long-term and comprehensive alliance that can survive the current estrangement - and continue even after Korean unification - by making a joint declaration with South Korea's government at the highest level.
In order to allay misgivings and restore trust in the alliance, it is necessary for the US and South Korea to reaffirm their common interests and values in pursuing deterrence, nonproliferation, stability, and democracy on the Korean peninsula and across Asia.
Once they resolve to continue their alliance with these purposes in mind, it should be possible for responsible officials to work out guiding principles for concrete security cooperation.
Specific negotiations on withdrawing American troops from Korea or on redeploying them from the DMZ to south of Seoul must be carried out according to these principles.
In so doing, America must treat South Korea as a full partner with its own voice in making decisions that affect its security interests.
As an American ally for 51 years, and as East Asia's third-largest economy, South Korea is entitled to be fully consulted on such decisions.
Despite anti-American sentiments among some South Koreans, a majority of the country's people wants American forces to remain as a stabilizing force.
Securing a peaceful and nuclear-free Korean peninsula, a place where the interests of China, Japan, Russia, and America directly intersect, is one of the most important security goals anywhere on the planet.
For this reason, America and South Korea must restore a strategic vision for the future.
America\u0027s Schizophrenic Economy
The news about America's economy that dribbled out over the first half of March painted - once again - a picture that only a schizophrenic could create.
Real investment (investment adjusted for the declining prices of high-tech and information-related capital goods) continued to roar ahead.
Production and sales were consistent with the consensus forecast of real GDP growth at an annual rate of 4% or more.
Yet, despite all this, employment remained stagnant: net job creation in the United States continues to stall.
This does not mean that employment in America cannot grow.
Roughly 300,000 more Americans are employed in education and health care than a year ago - an annual rate of employment growth of 1.7%.
A quarter of a million more Americans are employed in business and professional services than a year ago - a 1.6% annual rate of employment growth.
The logic of stagnant employment is not that adding jobs to the American economy is impossible, but that demand growth is insufficient to create more jobs than are lost.
This is easy to demonstrate.
Total nominal spending in America grows at 5.5% per year.
Inflation is 1.5% per year.
That 0.5% is all that is left for job growth, because that's all the job growth required to meet demand given the remarkably strong rate of growth of productivity.
The boost to wealth provided by the "new economy" is exceeding even its most avid boosters' wildest dreams.
What is unexpected is that the new wealth is flowing not to the shareholders of dot-com companies, but to purchasers and users of high-tech capital and the consumers they serve.
But why does this seem so surprising?
At the end of the nineteenth century the huge amount of investment and technological progress in America's railroads appeared to benefit everyone but the stockholders and bondholders of railroad companies, as bust followed boom and ramming worthless securities down the throats of investors became Wall Street's favorite sport.
Yet another part of US productivity growth due to the fact that high-tech capital gives America's firms enormous incentives to make massive but hard to see - and even harder to measure - investments in organization and business processes that are complementary to computerization and networking.
For the US to have a rate of productivity growth of 3.5% per annum rather than the pre-1995 rate of 1.2% is amazing.
That means an annual increment to world income of $250 billion from this source alone.
That's the equivalent of adding productive power equal to a quarter of the economy of India - and adding it every year.
This persistent acceleration in American productivity growth has, however, created a massive political problem for President George W. Bush.
Demand growth at a pace that in any previous decade would have been seen as highly satisfactory is suddenly desperately insufficient, and Bush is being blamed (with some justice) for the slack labor market that has resulted.
But for everyone except Bush - and those left unemployed by the lag in demand - it is an extraordinary opportunity.
The remarkable boosts to productivity that have been within America's grasp will ultimately lead to accelerating growth of real profits and real wages, if only US policy makers resist the temptation to pursue politically expedient, but economically damaging, measures to "protect" output and employment.
As the world's leading-edge economy, America faces the hardest work in ensuring growth, for it must create - not only copy and adapt - new technologies, better forms of capital, and more productive business organizations.
If America can grow as fast as it is now, that is very good news for other, less-developed economies, especially since one powerful effect of ongoing technological revolutions in computers and communications is to make it much easier to participate in the global division of labor now centered in the US.
So the schizophrenic American economy is a sign that the world is entering an economic era of truly wonderful things - if only we properly, and patiently, grasp them.
America’s Scorched Earth Management
Signs of the American economy’s perilous condition are everywhere – from yawning fiscal and current-account deficits to plummeting home prices and a feeble dollar.
But something that shows up in none of the economic indicators may be driving many of them: the deterioration of American management, which is undermining not only many of America’s great enterprises, but also its legendary spirit of enterprise.
Paradoxically, one indicator that has been improving steadily in the US – productivity – may be the clearest sign of the problem.
When it comes to productivity, managers either invest in employee training, more efficient manufacturing processes, and the like, or they take steps that appear to boost productivity in the short run but that erode it in the long run.
Productivity is a measure of output per hour worked.
So a company that fires all its workers and then ships from stock can look very productive – until it runs outs of stock.
Of course, no company can do that, but many US companies have been shedding workers and middle managers in great numbers – the figures for January 2008 were up 19% from a year earlier.
Meanwhile, those employees left behind must work that much harder, often without increased compensation.
Workers’ wages, adjusted for inflation, fell in 2007, continuing a trend throughout this decade.
That, too, is “productive” – until these overworked people quit or burn out.
A sustainable company is not a collection of “human resources.” It is a community of human beings.
Its strength resides in its people, its culture, and the goodwill it has built up among its customers and suppliers.
So, as workers and middle managers have been departing these companies, they have taken with them not only much critical information, but often also the hearts and souls of their enterprises, with profound effects on American competitiveness.
Consider high technology, where America is supposed to excel.
According to a November 2006 report by The Task Force on the Future of American Innovation, made up of prominent universities, think tanks, industry trade associations, and corporations, the high-tech trade deficit widened in 2005, for the third consecutive year.
This is not clothing or cars, but America’s largest, and most renowned, export sector.
This deficit reflects an underlying research deficit.
Of the 25 companies granted the most US patents in 2006, only eight were American; 12 were Japanese.
Perhaps this helps to explain why, in a survey of more than 60,000 people in 29 countries conducted in 2007 by the New York-based Reputation Institute to rank the “world’s most respected companies,” the first US company on the list appeared in 15th place; the second was in 25th place.
No one can determine how much of America’s productivity gains in recent years have resulted from squeezing human capital, because such things are not measured.
But there has clearly been a great deal of reliance on this strategy, with companies shedding employees not only because they must, but often because they have not met Wall Street analysts’ financial expectations.
Managers’ increased focus on maximizing shareholder value won many adherents when the idea was introduced in the 1980’s: the impersonal discipline of financial markets would force companies to become more productive and innovative.
And, in fact, much of the US productivity increase in the 1980’s and 1990’s can likely be attributed to large-scale investment in information and communications technology.
But, as the marginal productivity gains from such investment began to fall, senior managers’ survival and compensation continued to be tied to stock-market performance.
As a result, many simply learned to manage their companies’ short-term share price at the expense of attention to their products and customers.
Moreover, because maximizing shareholder value is a poor incentive for workers and middle managers, companies’ boards have increasingly centralized power around chief executives, thereby encouraging a “heroic” form of leadership that is detached from the rest of the enterprise.
Indeed, in many cases, the CEO – frequently a Wall Street-endorsed “superstar” parachuted in to “shake things up” – now
This shift to “heroic” leadership can be seen in ballooning CEO compensation.
According to a January 2008 report by the Hay Group, the CEO’s of the 50 largest US companies are now paid almost three times what their European counterparts receive ­– which is many hundreds of times more than their own workers.
Until recently, the US asset-price bubble ­– first in the stock market, then in real estate – masked the underlying depreciation of American enterprises.
But the bubble itself resulted from the same management pathologies as those afflicting the real economy.
After all, managing for the short run encouraged mortgage lenders to offer artificially low “teaser” interest rates to lure potential homeowners.
And then those who bought these mortgages never bothered to investigate their underlying value – a spectacular abdication of managerial responsibility.
Now that the bubble has burst, America’s current economic downturn is likely to be far worse than previous ones, because US enterprises will have to be rebuilt, slowly and carefully.
The dramatic weakening of the US dollar may help America to narrow its massive trade deficit, but we should not expect any sustained improvement without drastic changes in American management.
Fortunately, it may be possible to minimize the fallout for the rest of the world.
While American economists, politicians, and business leaders have for years sought to sell their model of management abroad, many companies elsewhere have not been buying it.
As a result, other key economies remain healthier than America’s.
Make no mistake: this problem was made in America, and that is where it will have to be solved.
America’s Self-Defeating Hegemony
When I wrote about the “end of history” almost twenty years ago, one thing that I did not anticipate was the degree to which American behavior and misjudgments would make anti-Americanism one of the chief fault-lines of global politics.
And yet, particularly since the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, that is precisely what has happened, owing to four key mistakes made by the Bush administration.
First, the doctrine of “preemption,” which was devised in response to the 2001 attacks, was inappropriately broadened to include Iraq and other so-called “rogue states” that threatened to develop weapons of mass destruction.
To be sure, preemption is fully justified vis-à-vis stateless terrorists wielding such weapons.
But it cannot be the core of a general non-proliferation policy, whereby the United States intervenes militarily everywhere to prevent the development of nuclear weapons.
The cost of executing such a policy simply would be too high (several hundred billion dollars and tens of thousands of casualties in Iraq and still counting).
This is why the Bush administration has shied away from military confrontations with North Korea and Iran, despite its veneration of Israel’s air strike on Iraq’s Osirak reactor in 1981, which set back Saddam Hussein’s nuclear program by several years.
After all, the very success of that attack meant that such limited intervention could never be repeated, because would-be proliferators learned to bury, hide, or duplicate their nascent weapons programs.
The second important miscalculation concerned the likely global reaction to America’s exercise of its hegemonic power.
Many people within the Bush administration believed that even without approval by the UN Security Council or NATO, American power would be legitimized by its successful use.
This had been the pattern for many US initiatives during the Cold War, and in the Balkans during the 1990’s; back then, it was known as “leadership” rather than “unilateralism.”
But, by the time of the Iraq war, conditions had changed: the US had grown so powerful relative to the rest of the world that the lack of reciprocity became an intense source of irritation even to America’s closest allies.
The structural anti-Americanism arising from the global distribution of power was evident well before the Iraq war, in the opposition to American-led globalization during the Clinton years.
But it was exacerbated by the Bush administration’s “in-your-face” disregard for a variety of international institutions as soon it came into office – a pattern that continued through the onset of the Iraq war.
America’s third mistake was to overestimate how effective conventional military power would be in dealing with the weak states and networked transnational organizations that characterize international politics, at least in the broader Middle East.
It is worth pondering why a country with more military power than any other in human history, and that spends as much on its military as virtually the rest of the world combined, cannot bring security to a small country of 24 million people after more than three years of occupation.
At least part of the problem is that it is dealing with complex social forces that are not organized into centralized hierarchies that can enforce rules, and thus be deterred, coerced, or otherwise manipulated through conventional power.
Israel made a similar mistake in thinking that it could use its enormous margin of conventional military power to destroy Hezbollah in last summer’s Lebanon War.
Both Israel and the US are nostalgic for a twentieth-century world of nation-states, which is understandable, since that is the world to which the kind of conventional power they possess is best suited.
But nostalgia has led both states to misinterpret the challenges they now face, whether by linking al-Qaeda to Saddam Hussein’s Iraq, or Hezbollah to Iran and Syria.
This linkage does exist in the case of Hezbollah, but the networked actors have their own social roots and are not simply pawns used by regional powers.
This is why the exercise of conventional power has become frustrating.
Finally, the Bush administration’s use of power has lacked not only a compelling strategy or doctrine, but also simple competence.
In Iraq alone, the administration misestimated the threat of WMD, failed to plan adequately for the occupation, and then proved unable to adjust quickly when things went wrong.
To this day, it has dropped the ball on very straightforward operational issues in Iraq, such as funding democracy promotion efforts.
Incompetence in implementation has strategic consequences.
Many of the voices that called for, and then bungled, military intervention in Iraq are now calling for war with Iran.
Why should the rest of the world think that conflict with a larger and more resolute enemy would be handled any more capably?
But the fundamental problem remains the lopsided distribution of power in the international system.
Any country in the same position as the US, even a democracy, would be tempted to exercise its hegemonic power with less and less restraint.
America’s founding fathers were motivated by a similar belief that unchecked power, even when democratically legitimated, could be dangerous, which is why they created a constitutional system of internally separated powers to limit the executive.
Such a system does not exist on a global scale today, which may explain how America got into such trouble.
A smoother international distribution of power, even in a global system that is less than fully democratic, would pose fewer temptations to abandon the prudent exercise of power.
America’s Self-Inflicted Decline
MELBOURNE – If the broad post-World War II prosperity that has endured for six decades comes to an end, both the United States and Europe will be responsible.
With rare exceptions, politics has become a discredited profession throughout the West.
Tomorrow is always treated as more important than next week, and next week prevails over next year, with no one seeking to secure the long-term future.
Now the West is paying the price.
President Barack Obama’s instincts may be an exception here, but he is fighting powerful hidebound forces in the United States, as well as a demagogic populism, in the form of the Tea Party, that is far worse – and that might defeat him in 2012, seriously damaging America in the process.
America’s friends around the world watched with dismay the recent brawl in over raising the federal government’s debt ceiling, and the US Congress’s inability to come to anything like a balanced and forward-looking compromise.
On the contrary, the outcome represents a significant victory for the Tea Party’s minions, whose purpose seems to be to reduce government obligations and expenditures to a bare minimum (some object even to having a central bank), and to maintain President George W. Bush’s outrageous tax breaks for the wealthy.
America’s current fiscal problems are rooted in a long period of unfunded spending.
Bush’s wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, and the manner in which he conducted the “global war on terror” made matters much worse, contributing to a totally unsustainable situation.
Indeed, Obama inherited an almost impossible legacy.
In the weeks since the debt ceiling agreement, it has become increasingly clear that good government might be impossible in the US.
The coming months of campaigning for the US presidency will be spent in petty brawling over what should be cut.
The example of recent weeks gives us no cause for optimism that US legislators will rise above partisan politics and ask themselves what is best for America.
In these circumstances, it is not surprising that financial markets have returned to extreme volatility.
The expenditure cuts mandated by the outcome of the debt-ceiling debate will reduce economic activity, thereby undermining growth and making debt reduction even more difficult.
Providing further fiscal stimulus to boost economic growth would carry its own risks, owing to the debt ceiling and another, more ominous factor: America is already overly indebted, and there are signs that major holders of US government securities are finally tired of being repaid in depreciated currency.
Most importantly, China’s call for the introduction of a new reserve currency stems from its frustration with the failure of major governments – whether in the US or Europe – to govern their economic affairs with realism and good sense.
China recognizes that America is in great difficulty (indeed, it recognizes this more clearly than the US itself), and that, given the poisonous political atmosphere prevailing in Washington, there will be no easy return to good government, economic stability, and strong growth.
America’s leadership in world affairs began to weaken with the unilateralism of Bush, and today’s economic problems are reinforcing this tendency.
To reverse America’s decline, Obama needs bipartisan support for his (quite mainstream) policies, but so far the US Congress has shown no stomach for a principled approach to its legislative duties.
If Germany’s half-hearted efforts to stabilize Europe somehow turn out to be successful, America’s position will be further eroded, and central banks around the world will begin to regard the euro once again as a reliable alternative to the dollar as a reserve currency.
The alternative, as China has suggested, would be to develop a new reserve currency.
These realities represent a power shift of a kind that we have not experienced in our lifetimes.
China’s economic power over the US is now substantial, and will limit not only America’s influence in the financial markets, but also its capacity to use military power.
If this forces America back towards what the international-relations scholar Joseph Nye calls “soft power and multilateral diplomacy,” it may well be a good thing.
But such approaches are anathema to the US Republican Party, and to its Tea Party faction in particular, and they might unnerve the many Asians who are nervous at China’s growing military might.
The counter-argument – that any sell-off or failure by China to continue to buy US government securities would hurt China as much as America – is not valid.
As each year passes, China’s markets expand worldwide, and its domestic market comes to represent a greater percentage of its own GDP.
As a result, China will not need a strong dollar in the long term.
Americans need to get their economic house in order before China loses its incentive to support the dollar.
On several occasions in the post-WWII period, the US has learned with great pain that there are limits to the effective use of military power.
American objectives could not be achieved in Vietnam.
The outcome in Iraq will not be determined until the last American troops have been withdrawn.
In Afghanistan, where withdrawal dates have already been set, it is difficult to believe that a cohesive unified state can be established.
As the efficacy of military power is reduced, so the importance of economic power grows.
Recognition of these central realities – and bipartisanship in addressing them – is critical for America’s future, and that of the West.
America’s Socialism for the Rich
With all the talk of “green shoots” of economic recovery, America’s banks are pushing back on efforts to regulate them.
While politicians talk about their commitment to regulatory reform to prevent a recurrence of the crisis, this is one area where the devil really is in the details – and the banks will muster what muscle they have left to ensure that they have ample room to continue as they have in the past.
The old system worked well for the bankers (if not for their shareholders), so why should they embrace change?
Indeed, the efforts to rescue them devoted so little thought to the kind of post-crisis financial system we want that we will end up with a banking system that is less competitive, with the large banks that were too big too fail even larger.
It has long been recognized that those America’s banks that are too big to fail are also too big to be managed.
That is one reason that the performance of several of them has been so dismal.
Because government provides deposit insurance, it plays a large role in restructuring (unlike other sectors).&nbsp; Normally, when a bank fails, the government engineers a financial restructuring; if it has to put in money, it, of course, gains a stake in the future.
Officials know that if they wait too long, zombie or near zombie banks –&nbsp;with little or no net worth, but treated as if they were viable institutions – are likely to “gamble on resurrection.”
If they take big bets and win, they walk away with the proceeds; if they fail, the government picks up the tab.
This is not just theory; it is a lesson we learned, at great expense, during the Savings &amp; Loan crisis of the 1980’s.
When the ATM machine says, “insufficient funds,” the government doesn’t want this to mean that the bank, rather than your account, is out of money, so it intervenes before the till is empty.
In a financial restructuring, shareholders typically get wiped out, and bondholders become the new shareholders.
Sometimes, the government must provide additional funds; sometimes it looks for a new investor to take over the failed bank.
The Obama administration has, however, introduced a new concept: too big to be financially restructured.
The administration argues that all hell would break loose if we tried to play by the usual rules with these big banks.
Markets would panic.
So, not only can’t we touch the bondholders, we can’t even touch the shareholders – even if most of the shares’ existing value merely reflects a bet on a government bailout.
I think this judgment is wrong.
I think the Obama administration has succumbed to political pressure and scare-mongering by the big banks.
As a result, the administration has confused bailing out the bankers and their shareholders with bailing out the banks.
Restructuring gives banks a chance for a new start: new potential investors (whether in equity or debt instruments) will have more confidence, other banks will be more willing to lend to them, and they will be more willing to lend to others.
The bondholders will gain from an orderly restructuring, and if the value of the assets is truly greater than the market (and outside analysts) believe, they will eventually reap the gains.
But what is clear is that the Obama strategy’s current and future costs are very high – and so far, it has not achieved its limited objective of restarting lending.
The taxpayer has had to pony up billions, and has provided billions more in guarantees – bills that are likely to come due in the future.
Rewriting the rules of the market economy – in a way that has benefited those that have caused so much pain to the entire global economy – is worse than financially costly.
Most Americans view it as grossly unjust, especially after they saw the banks divert the billions intended to enable them to revive lending to payments of outsized bonuses and dividends.
Tearing up the social contract is something that should not be done lightly.
But this new form of ersatz capitalism, in which losses are socialized and profits privatized, is doomed to failure.
Incentives are distorted.
There is no market discipline.
The too-big-to-be-restructured banks know that they can gamble with impunity – and, with the Federal Reserve making funds available at near-zero interest rates, there are ample funds to do so.
Some have called this new economic regime “socialism with American characteristics.”
But socialism is concerned about ordinary individuals.
By contrast, the United States has provided little help for the millions of Americans who are losing their homes.
Workers who lose their jobs receive only 39 weeks of limited unemployment benefits, and are then left on their own.
And, when they lose their jobs, most lose their health insurance, too.
America has expanded its corporate safety net in unprecedented ways, from commercial banks to investment banks, then to insurance, and now to automobiles, with no end in sight.
In truth, this is not socialism, but an extension of long standing corporate welfarism.
The rich and powerful turn to the government to help them whenever they can, while needy individuals get little social protection.
We need to break up the too-big-to-fail banks; there is no evidence that these behemoths deliver societal benefits that are commensurate with the costs they have imposed on others.
And, if we don’t break them up, then we have to severely limit what they do.
They can’t be allowed to do what they did in the past – gamble at others’ expenses.
This raises another problem with America’s too-big-to-fail, too-big-to-be-restructured banks: they are too politically powerful.
Their lobbying efforts worked well, first to deregulate, and then to have taxpayers pay for the cleanup.
Their hope is that it will work once again to keep them free to do as they please, regardless of the risks for taxpayers and the economy.
We cannot afford to let that happen.
America’s Sputnik Moment in Beijing
NEW YORK – August 8, 2008, may someday be remembered as the first day of the post-American era.
Or it could be remembered as another “Sputnik moment,” when, as with the Soviet foray into outer space in 1957, the American people realized that the country had lost its footing and decided it was time for the United States to get its act together.
There was no mistaking the power and symbolism of the opening ceremonies for the Beijing Olympic Games on August 8.
That multimedia spectacular did far more than trace China’s 5,000-year history; it was a statement that China is a major civilization that demands and deserves its rightful place in the global hierarchy.
There was also no mistaking the symbolism of seeing President Bush, waving cheerfully from his spot in the bleachers while Chinese President Hu Jintao sat behind what looked more like a throne.
It is hard to imagine that China’s government, which obsesses over every minute issue of diplomatic protocol, had not orchestrated this stark image of America’s decline relative to the country to which it owes $1.4 trillion.
It would be hard to imagine Franklin Roosevelt or Ronald Reagan accepting a similar relative position.
At the very same time that Bush was waving from the stands, Russia was invading Georgia, America’s closest partner in the Caucasus.
Russia’s message to other West-leaning countries in the former Soviet world was clear: America cannot protect you.
Frighteningly, the Russians were likely correct.
While the Iraq quagmire has made it difficult for America to project force around the world, America’s growing debt, conflicts with friends and enemies alike, absence of any perceivable strategy for changing times, and its political system’s seeming inability to take action to address these challenges have combined to turn America into a struggling giant.
Today, from Iran to Darfur to Zimbabwe to Georgia, the world is witnessing the effects of a budding post-American world, and the picture does not look pretty.
As much as we all value the rise of new powers like China and India, it remains to be seen whether these countries will become as benevolent a power as America, however flawed, has been over the past half-century.
Neo-colonialism is returning to Africa, the global project of human rights is in retreat, and the world trade system is becoming far less open.
Brutal dictators go unpunished because their interests are protected by large powers with stakes in their natural resources.
Reversing this trend is not only in America’s interest, but also in the world’s interest.
But America can make it so only by recognizing the great challenges it faces and taking bold steps towards addressing them, at home and with allies abroad.
America’s Perilous Pivot
MADRID – The Pacific or the Middle East?
For the United States, that is now the primary strategic question.
The violence in Gaza, coming as President Barack Obama was meeting Asia’s leaders in Phnom Penh, perfectly encapsulates America’s dilemma.
Instead of being able to focus on US foreign policy’s “pivot” to Asia, Obama was forced to spend many hours in conversation with the leaders of Egypt and Israel, and to dispatch Secretary of State Hillary Clinton from Asia, in order to facilitate a cease-fire in Gaza.
Of the two geopolitical focal points demanding America’s attention, one represents the future and the other the past.
Whereas Asia played an important role in a US presidential election campaign that was marked by often-heated references to China’s rise, the Middle East has kept the US bogged down for decades.
In addition to the eternal Israel-Palestine conflict, Iraq’s instability, the Arab Spring, Syria’s civil war, and the ongoing nuclear standoff with Iran all demand America’s attention.
If the Iran crisis were to boil over, the pivot to Asia would no longer be America’s main foreign-policy priority.
But if the dispute with Iran is resolved diplomatically, the Middle East might, perhaps, be relegated to a position of lesser importance, as Obama clearly desires.
The question, therefore, is whether the US will find itself drawn into another war in a region on which it depends less and less for energy.
Indeed, the revolution in non-conventional hydrocarbons, particularly shale gas and oil, which the International Energy Agency recently predicted would make the US the world’s largest oil producer by 2020, and the top energy producer overall by 2030, will have enormous global repercussions.
For the US, energy self-sufficiency is the perfect excuse for a phased withdrawal from the Middle East; freed from energy dependency, America should be able to concentrate on the Pacific.
Although maintaining stable global energy prices and its alliance with Israel means that the US cannot cut itself off completely from the Middle East’s troubles, the shift in focus to Asia began early in Obama’s first administration, with Clinton announcing America’s strategic reorientation even before US troops began withdrawing from Iraq.
Following his re-election, Obama’s first foreign visit was to Myanmar, Thailand, and Cambodia – a choice that cannot have pleased China, as all three are ASEAN members, while Myanmar was, until it began its democratic transition, a close Chinese ally.
Asia is, of course, experiencing rapid economic growth, but managing the region’s strong nationalist tensions calls for the creation of regional security structures, together with closer economic integration.
Complicating matters even more is what US scholar Kenneth Lieberthal and Wang Jisi, the dean of international studies at Peking University, called in a recent paper for the Brookings Institution “strategic distrust.”
Cultivating strategic trust between the twenty-first century’s leading powers will be fundamental to the international system’s harmonious functioning.
But how can this be achieved?
As China will be importing three-quarters of its oil from the Middle East by 2020, one step forward would be China’s cooperation in finding solutions to the region’s problems.
After the January 2013 Israeli elections, Iran will again move to the top of Obama’s foreign-policy agenda.
Military intervention in Iran – which itself will be holding a presidential election in June – would incite not only regional, but global, instability.
The Arab world, Russia, and China would be forced to take sides, straining global relations between the different poles of power and raising tensions in the Pacific.
So China has a large strategic interest in working with the US to avoid a showdown.
Beyond Iran, the volatile situation throughout the Middle East urgently demands solutions.
The latest eruption of violent conflict between Hamas and Israel underscores the importance of reviving the peace process.
Syria’s civil war, in which a growing number of regional players have become involved, is beginning to look increasingly like a trial run for all-out war between Sunni Muslims (Saudi Arabia and the other Gulf States, Turkey, and Egypt) and Shia Muslims (Iran and Hezbollah) for regional dominance.
Iran’s leaders appear to believe that the US, having incurred extremely high economic and human costs from more than a decade of war, would rather avoid another military intervention.
US public opinion seems to confirm this.
A recent survey by the Chicago Council on Global Affairs indicated that 67% of Americans believe that the Iraq war was not worthwhile.
Moreover, 69% do not believe that the US is safer from terrorism since the war in Afghanistan, and 71% say that the experience in Iraq shows that the US should take greater care in how it uses force.
But, if Americans seem unlikely to be willing to invest billions of dollars in another dead-end foreign adventure, Iran’s leaders, for their part, are increasingly hemmed in by international sanctions, which are beginning to wreak havoc on the country’s economy.
Both sides may believe that their best option – at least for now – is to negotiate.
Peaceful resolution of the Iranian question would help the US to complete its shift toward Asia.
China may not wish for that outcome, but its own vital interest in the security of Middle East energy supplies should compel it to cooperate.
After all, another Middle East conflict would poison and distort relations in the region for decades, which would be the worst of all possible consequences – for the US and China alike.
America’s Suicidal Statecraft
Since its victory in the Cold War, America’s global hegemony has rested on three pillars: economic power, military might, and a vast capacity to export its popular culture.
The recent emergence of additional powers – the European Union, China, India, and a Russia driven to recover its lost status – has eroded America’s capacity to shape events unilaterally.
Even so, America remains by far the world’s most powerful country; its decline has more to do with its incompetent use of power than with the emergence of competitors.
It is American leaders’ “suicidal statecraft,” to use Arnold Toynbee’s pithy phrase for what he considered the ultimate cause of imperial collapse, that is to blame for America’s plight.
Consider the Middle East.
Nothing reveals the decline of the United States in the region better than the contrast between America’s sober use of power in the first Gulf War in 1991 and the hubris and deceit of today’s Iraq war.
In 1991, America forged the most formidable international coalition since World War II, and led it in a fully legitimate war aimed at restoring regional balance after Saddam Hussein’s invasion of Kuwait.
In 2003, America went to war without its trans-Atlantic allies after manipulating false assertions.
In doing so, the US embarked on a preposterous grand strategy that aimed no less at simultaneously dismantling Iraq’s tyrannical regime, restructuring the entire Middle East, destroying al-Qaeda, and helping democracy to take root throughout the Arab world.
The result has been utter failure: military defeat and a severe degradation of America’s moral standing.
Rather than undermining radical Islam, the US has legitimized it, in Iraq and beyond.
Indeed, what will now shape the future of the region is not democracy, but the violent divide between Shiites and Sunnis that the Iraq war precipitated.
It is this Muslim civil war that is allowing al-Qaeda to gain a larger pool of recruits.
With Iraq probably becoming the first Arab country to be ruled by Shiites, and hence integrated into an expanding Shiite Iranian empire, America’s Sunni allies in the region now view the US as unreliable.
Indeed, the US is seen as practically complicit in inciting a monumental reversal of Islam’s fortunes, the Shia revival.
Nor is the gospel of democracy especially dear to America’s Arab allies, for the call to democratize has only emboldened the Islamists to challenge the incumbent elites for power.
Admittedly, violent Islamic fundamentalism has deeper roots in the fading promise of Arab nationalism.
But America’s misbegotten democratic message has ended up alienating both its conservative regional allies, as it gave a new lease on life to political Islam, which can use the ballot box as a route to power, and the Islamists, whose electoral gains are then rejected by the US.
America’s biggest strategic blunder in the Middle East arguably concerns the emergence of Iranian power.
By destroying Iraq as a counterbalancing regional force, the US dealt a major blow to its traditional Gulf allies, for whom Iraq served as a barrier against Iran’s ambitions.
America offered Iran on a silver platter strategic assets that Khomeini’s revolution failed to acquire either in eight years of war against Saddam or in its abortive attempts to export the Islamic revolution throughout the region.
Likewise, Iran’s nuclear program gained momentum thanks to its sense of impunity following the colossal failure in Iraq of America’s concept of “preventive war.”
The calamitous US military experience in Iraq has left it strategically diminished.
Iraq has now become God’s playground, and America can hope to achieve a modicum of stability there only with the help of other regional powers.
Nevertheless, the US will remain the most influential external actor in the Middle East, for its failure is one of leadership, not of actual power.
Humbled by military defeat, America can recover its regional relevance only by avoiding the sin of hubris, and learning to lead without attempting to dominate.
This requires engaging revolutionary forces like Iran and Syria; respecting, rather than ostracizing, those Islamist movements that have opted out from jihadism in favor of political participation; and leading an international alliance for an Arab-Israeli peace based on the Arab League initiative.
Indeed, the paradox of America’s pernicious policies in Iraq is that they have created favorable conditions for an Arab-Israeli peace, as the emergence of Iran and the threat of a fundamentalist tsunami have focused Arab minds on the urgency of a settlement with Israel.
The Palestinian issue is not the source of all the Middle East’s ills, but its resolution would dramatically improve America’s standing among Arabs.
More importantly, it would deny Iran the ability to link popular Islamic and Arab causes with its own hegemonic ambitions.
America’s Threat to Trans-Pacific Trade
MUMBAI – As if undermining the World Trade Organization’s Doha Round of global free-trade talks was not bad enough (the last ministerial meeting in Geneva produced barely a squeak), the United States has compounded its folly by actively promoting the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP).
President Barack Obama announced this with nine Asian countries during his recent trip to the region.
The TPP is being sold in the US to a compliant media and unsuspecting public as evidence of American leadership on trade.
But the opposite is true, and it is important that those who care about the global trading system know what is happening.
One hopes that this knowledge will trigger what I call the “Dracula effect”: expose that which would prefer to remain hidden to sunlight and it will shrivel up and die.
The TPP is a testament to the ability of US industrial lobbies, Congress, and presidents to obfuscate public policy.
It is widely understood today that free-trade agreements (FTAs), whether bilateral or plurilateral (among more than two countries but fewer than all) are built on discrimination.
That is why economists typically call them preferential-trade agreements (PTAs).
And that is why the US government’s public-relations machine calls what is in fact a discriminatory plurilateral FTA, a “partnership” invoking a false aura of cooperation and cosmopolitanism.
Countries are, in principle, free to join the TPP.
Japan and Canada have said they plan to do so.
But a closer look reveals that China is not a part of this agenda.
The TPP is also a political response to China's new aggressiveness, built therefore in a spirit of confrontation and containment, not of cooperation.
The US has been establishing a template for its PTAs that includes several items unrelated to trade. So it is no surprise that the TPP template includes numerous agendas unrelated to trade, such as labor standards and restraints on the use of capital-account controls, many of which preclude China’s accession.
From the outset, the TPP’s supposed openness has been wholly misleading.
Towards this end, the TPP was negotiated with the weaker countries like Vietnam, Singapore, and New Zealand, which were easily bamboozled into accepting such conditions.
Only then were bigger countries like Japan offered membership on a “take it or leave it” basis.
The PR machine then went into overdrive by calling the inclusion of these extraneous conditions as making the TPP a “high-quality” trade agreement for the twenty-first century, when in fact it was a rip-off by several domestic lobbies.
American regionalism closer to home shows the US now trying to promote the Free Trade Agreement of the Americas (FTAA).
But its preferred template was to expand the North America Free Trade Agreement (Canada, Mexico, and the US) to the Andean countries and include huge doses of non-trade-related issues, which they swallowed.
This was not acceptable to Brazil, the leading force behind the FTAA, which focuses exclusively on trade issues.
Brazil’s former President Luiz Lula Inácio da Silva, one of the world’s great trade-union leaders, rejected the inclusion of labor standards in trade treaties and institutions.
The result of US efforts in South America, therefore, has been to fragment the region into two blocs, and the same is likely to happen in Asia.
Ever since the US realized that it had chosen the wrong region to be regional with, it has been trying to win a seat at the Asian table.
The US finally got it with the TPP, simply because China had become aggressive in asserting its territorial claims in the South China Sea, the South China Sea, and vis-à-vis India and Japan.
Many Asian countries joined the TPP to “keep the US in the region” in the face of Chinese heavy-handedness.
They embraced the US in the same way that East Europeans rushed to join NATO and the European Union in the face of the threat, real or imagined, posed by post-Soviet Russia.
America’s design for Asian trade is inspired by the goal of containing China, and the TPP template effectively excludes it, owing to the non-trade-related conditions imposed by US lobbies.
The only way that a Chinese merger with the TPP could gain credibility would be to make all non-trade-related provisions optional.
Of course, the US lobbies would have none of it.
America’s Three Deficits
BERKELEY – This year began with a series of reports providing tantalizing evidence that economic recovery in the United States is strengthening.
The pace of job creation has increased, indicators for manufacturing and services have improved, and consumption spending has been stronger than anticipated.
But it is too early to celebrate.
Output growth in the US remains anemic, and the economy continues to face three significant deficits: a jobs deficit, an investment deficit, and a long-run fiscal deficit, none of which is likely to be addressed in an election year.
Although output is now higher than it was in the fourth quarter of 2007, it remains far below what could be produced if labor and capacity were fully utilized.
That gap – between actual and potential output – is estimated at more than 7% of GDP (more than $1 trillion).
The output gap reflects a deficit of more than 12 million jobs – the number of jobs needed to return to the economy’s peak 2007 employment level and absorb the 125,000 people who enter the labor force each month.
Even if the economy grows at 2.5% in 2012, as most forecasts anticipate, the jobs deficit will remain – and will not be closed until 2024.
America’s jobs deficit is primarily the result of inadequate aggregate demand.
Consumption, which accounts for about 70% of total spending, is constrained by high unemployment, weak wage gains, and a steep decline in home values and consumer wealth.
The uptick in consumption in the last months of 2011 was financed by a decline in the household saving rate and a large increase in consumer credit.
Neither of these trends is healthy or sustainable.
With an unemployment rate of 8.5%, a labor-force participation rate of only 64%, and stagnant real wages, labor income has fallen to an historic low of 44% of national income.
And labor income is the most important component of household earnings, the major driver of consumption spending.
Even before the Great Recession, American workers and households were in trouble.
The rate of job growth between 2000 and 2007 slowed to only half its level in the three preceding decades.
Productivity growth was strong, but far outpaced wage growth, and workers’ real hourly compensation declined, on average, even for those with a university education.
Indeed, the 2002-2007 period was the only recovery on record during which the median family’s real income declined.
Moreover, job opportunities continued to polarize, with employment growing in high-wage professional, technical, and managerial occupations, as well as in low-wage food-service, personal-care, and protective-service occupations.
By contrast, employment in middle-skill, white-collar, and blue-collar occupations fell, particularly in manufacturing.
Hard-pressed American households slashed their savings rates, borrowed against their home equity, and increased their debt to maintain consumption, contributing to the housing and credit bubbles that burst in 2008, requiring painful deleveraging ever since.
Three forces have driven the US labor market’s adverse structural changes:
·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Skill-biased technological change, which has automated routine work while boosting demand for highly educated workers with at least a college degree.
·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Global competition and the integration of labor markets through trade and outsourcing, which have eliminated jobs and depressed wages.
·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; America’s declining competitiveness as an attractive place to locate production and employment.
Technological change and globalization have created similar labor-market challenges in other developed countries.
But US policy choices are responsible for the erosion of America’s competitiveness.
In particular, the US is underinvesting in three major areas that help countries to create and retain high-wage jobs: skills and training, infrastructure, and research and development.
Spending in these areas accounts for less than 10% of US government spending, and this share has been declining over time.
The federal government can currently borrow at record-low interest rates, and there are many projects in education, infrastructure, and research that would earn a higher return, create jobs now, and bolster US competitiveness in attracting high-wage jobs.
President Barack Obama has offered numerous proposals to invest in the foundations of national competitiveness, but Congressional Republicans have rebuffed them, claiming that the US faces an impending fiscal crisis.
In fact, the federal deficit as a share of GDP will shrink significantly over the next several years, even without further deficit-reduction measures, before rising to unsustainable levels by 2030.
The US does indeed face a long-run fiscal deficit, largely the result of rising health-care costs and an aging population.
But the current fiscal deficit mainly reflects weak tax revenues, owing to slow growth and high unemployment, and temporary stimulus measures that are fading away at a time when aggregate demand remains weak and additional fiscal stimulus is warranted.
At the very least, to keep the economy on course for 2.5% growth this year, the payroll tax cut and unemployment benefits proposed by Obama should be extended through the end of the year.
These measures would provide insurance to the fragile recovery and add nothing to the long-run fiscal gap.
So, how should the US economy’s jobs deficit, investment deficit, and long-run fiscal deficit be addressed?
Policymakers should pair fiscal measures to ameliorate the jobs and investment deficits now with a multi-year plan to reduce the long-run fiscal deficit gradually.
This long-run plan should increase spending on education, infrastructure, and research, while curbing future growth in health-care spending through the cost-containment mechanisms contained in Obama’s health-reform legislation.
Approving a long-run deficit-reduction plan now but deferring its starting date until the economy is near full employment would prevent premature fiscal contraction from tipping the economy back into recession.
Indeed, enactment of such a package could bolster output and employment growth by easing investor concerns about future deficits and strengthening consumer and business confidence.
Painful choices about how to close the long-run fiscal gap should be decided now and implemented promptly once the economy has recovered.
But, for the next few years, the priorities of fiscal policy should be jobs, investment, and growth.
America’s Ungovernable Budget
NEW YORK – The heart of any government is found in its budget.
Politicians can make endless promises, but if the budget doesn’t add up, politics is little more than mere words.
The United States is now caught in such a bind.
In his recent State of the Union address, President Barack Obama painted a convincing picture of modern, twenty-first-century government.
His Republican Party opponents complained that Obama’s proposals would bust the budget.
But the truth is that both parties are hiding from the reality: without more taxes, a modern, competitive US economy is not possible.
Obama rightly emphasized that competitiveness in the world today depends on an educated workforce and modern infrastructure.
That is true for any country, but it is especially relevant for rich countries.
The US and Europe are in direct competition with Brazil, China, India, and other emerging economies, where wage levels are sometimes one-quarter those in high-income countries (if not even lower).
America and Europe will keep their high living standards only by basing their competitiveness on advanced skills, cutting-edge technologies, and modern infrastructure.
That is why Obama called for an increase in US public investment in three areas: education, science and technology, and infrastructure (including broadband Internet, fast rail, and clean energy).
He spelled out a vision of future growth in which public and private investment would be complementary, mutually supportive pillars.
Obama emphasized these themes for good reason.
Unemployment in the US now stands at nearly 10% of the labor force, in part because more new jobs are being created in the emerging economies, and many of the jobs now being created in the US pay less than in the past, owing to greater global competition.
Unless the US steps up its investment in education, science, technology, and infrastructure, these adverse trends will continue.
But Obama’s message lost touch with reality when he turned his attention to the budget deficit.
Acknowledging that recent fiscal policies had put the US on an unsustainable trajectory of rising public debt, Obama said that moving towards budget balance was now essential for fiscal stability.
So he called for a five-year freeze on what the US government calls “discretionary” civilian spending.
The problem is that more than half of such spending is on education, science and technology, and infrastructure – the areas that Obama had just argued should be strengthened.
After telling Americans how important government investment is for modern growth, he promised to freeze that spending for the next five years!
Politicians often change their message from one speech to the next, but rarely contradict it so glaringly in the same speech.
That contradiction highlights the sad and self-defeating nature of US budget policies over the past 25 years, and most likely in the years to come.
On the one hand, the US government must invest more to promote economic competitiveness.
On the other hand, US taxes are chronically too low to support the level of government investment that is needed.
America’s fiscal reality was made painfully clear two days after Obama’s speech, in a new study from the Congressional Budget Office, which revealed that the budget deficit this year will reach nearly $1.5 trillion – a sum almost unimaginable even for an economy the size of the US.
At nearly 10% of GDP, the deficit is resulting in a mountain of debt that threatens America’s future.
The CBO study also made clear that December’s tax-cut agreement between Obama and the Republican opposition willfully and deliberately increased the budget deficit sharply.
Various tax cuts initiated by George W. Bush were set to expire at the end of 2010.
Obama and the Republicans agreed to continue those tax cuts for at least two years (they will now probably continue beyond that), thereby lowering tax revenue by $350 billion this year and again in 2012.
Tax cuts for the richest Americans were part of the package.
The truth of US politics today is simple.
The key policy for the leaders of both political parties is tax cuts, especially for the rich.
Both political parties, and the White House, would rather cut taxes than spend more on education, science and technology, and infrastructure.
And the explanation is straightforward: the richest households fund political campaigns.
Both parties therefore cater to their wishes.
As a result, America’s total tax revenues as a share of national income are among the lowest of all high-income countries, roughly 30%, compared to around 40% in Europe.  But 30% of GDP is not enough to cover the needs of health, education, science and technology, social security, infrastructure, and other vital government responsibilities.
One budget area can and should be cut: military spending.
But even if America’s wildly excessive military budget is cut sharply (and politicians in both parties are resisting that), there will still be a need for new taxes.
The economic and social consequences of a generation of tax cutting are clear.
America is losing its international competitiveness, neglecting its poor – one in five American children is trapped in poverty – and leaving a mountain of debt to its young.
For all of the Obama administration’s lofty rhetoric, his fiscal-policy proposals make no serious attempt to address these problems.
To do so would require calling for higher taxes, and that – as George H. W. Bush learned in 1992 – is no way to get re-elected.
America’s Unhinged “Pivot”
NEW DELHI – President Barack Obama’s first foreign trip since winning a second term highlights Asia’s new centrality to America’s economy and security.
But Obama’s Asian tour also underscores the main question about American policy in the region: Will the United States’ “pivot” to Asia acquire concrete strategic content, or will it remain largely a rhetorical repackaging of old policies?
The United States, quick to capitalize on regional concerns triggered by China’s increasingly muscular self-assertion, has strengthened its military ties with its existing Asian allies and forged security relationships with new friends.
But the heady glow of America’s return to center stage in Asia has obscured key challenges in remaining the region’s principal security anchor in the face of China’s strategic ambitions.
One challenge is the need to arrest the erosion of America’s relative power, which in turn requires comprehensive domestic renewal, including fiscal consolidation.
But the need for spending cuts also raises the prospect that the US might be unable to finance a military shift toward the Asia-Pacific region – or, worse, that it will be forced to retrench there.
The US under Obama has increasingly ceded ground to China, a trend that admittedly began when the Bush administration became preoccupied with the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq.
This has spurred doubts about America’s ability to provide strategic heft to its “pivot” by sustaining a higher level of commitment in the Asia-Pacific region, where it already maintains 320,000 troops.
The proposed deployment of an additional 2,500 Marines in Australia is largely symbolic.
In fact, after raising Asians’ expectations of a more robust US response to China’s growing assertiveness, the Obama administration has started to tamp down the military aspects of its “pivot,” emphasizing instead greater US economic engagement.
That change has come as a relief to those in the region who fear being forced to choose between the US and China.
But, for the countries bearing the brunt of China’s recalcitrant approach to territorial and maritime disputes, this emphasis raises new doubts about America’s commitment.
In fact, the economic reorientation of the US “pivot” corrects a policy that had overemphasized the military component and put the US on a path toward conflict with China.
It was Secretary of State Hillary Clinton who signaled a more hawkish US stance on China with her tough talk at the 2010 Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Regional Forum in Hanoi; now she is moderating that position by promoting trade and investment during her visits to Asian countries.
Obama, too, is highlighting the economic aspects of the US “pivot,” portraying his Asia tour as an effort to generate more domestic manufacturing jobs through higher exports to “the most rapidly growing and dynamic region in the world.”
Even his historic visit to Myanmar – the first ever by a US president – is as much about trade as it is about weaning a strategically located, resource-rich country from Chinese influence.
The refocus on trade and economic issues has also prompted Washington to promote the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which aims to create a new Asia-Pacific free-trade group that excludes China.
Moreover, the US is emphasizing the importance of the East Asia Summit and ASEAN, whose summit overlaps with the EAS meeting in Phnom Penh that Obama will be attending.
The US course correction is being dictated by another consideration as well: America has nothing to gain from taking sides in China’s disputes with its neighbors – unless, of course, US interests are directly at stake, as in the South China Sea, where Chinese maritime claims threaten freedom of navigation in some of the world’s most heavily trafficked shipping lanes.
Concern for its own national interest explains why America has charted a course of tacit neutrality regarding the revival of Sino-Indian territorial disputes, including China’s sudden resurrection of a claim to the large Himalayan Indian state of Arunachal Pradesh.
Similarly, the US has urged both China and Japan to resolve peacefully their dispute over the Japanese-controlled Senkaku Islands.
America’s main goal is to prevent the standoff from escalating to the point that it would be forced – against its own interests –&#160;to take Japan’s side.
When US Defense Secretary Leon Panetta met Chinese leader Xi Jinping in China in September, he got “an earful” that the US should stay out of the Sino-Japanese dispute. Indeed, amid the orchestrated anti-Japanese protests in China in September, Panetta – instead of advising China to rein in the often-violent demonstrations –&#160;publicly reiterated America’s neutrality in the struggle over control of the islands.
The correction in US policy actually extends even to terminology.
American diplomats have now abandoned the term “pivot” altogether, owing to its military connotation, in favor of “rebalancing.”
Whatever one calls it, the new policy approach is all about China, with America bolstering alliances and friendships with countries around China’s periphery, including India, Japan, the Philippines, Vietnam, Indonesia, and South Korea.
Yet the Obama administration continues to deny that China is at the center of its strategy. In fact, it is reluctant to say or do anything publicly that might raise China’s hackles.
The Asia-Pacific region will loom larger in Obama’s second-term agenda, especially as the ongoing US troop withdrawal ends the Afghanistan war by 2014.
But Obama will have to define a clearer US policy, addressing China’s rapid rise under an authoritarian regime that aggressively pursues border claims and whips up nationalism at home.
The US and the rest of Asia must not merely adjust to China; they must seek to shape a China that plays by the rules.
America’s War-Torn Economy
NEW YORK – Some say there are two issues in the coming American elections: the Iraq war and the economy.
On days when the war seems to be going better than expected, and the economy worse, the economy eclipses the war; but neither is faring well.
In some sense, there is only one issue, and that is the war, which has exacerbated America’s economic problems.
And when the world’s largest economy is sick – and it is now very sick – the entire world suffers.
It used to be thought that wars were good for the economy.
After all, World War II is widely thought to have helped lift the global economy out of the Great Depression.
But, at least since Keynes, we know how to stimulate the economy more effectively, and in ways that increase long-term productivity and enhance living standards.
This war, in particular, has not been good for the economy, for three reasons.
First, it has contributed to rising oil prices.
When the United States went to war, oil cost less than $25 a barrel, and futures markets expected it to remain there for a decade.
Futures traders knew about the growth of China and other emerging markets; but they expected supply – mainly from low-cost Middle East providers – to increase in tandem with demand.
The war changed that equation.
Higher oil prices mean that Americans (and Europeans and Japanese) are paying hundreds of millions of dollars to Middle East oil dictators and oil exporters elsewhere in the world rather than spending it at home. 
Moreover, money spent on the Iraq war does not stimulate the economy today as much as money spent at home on roads, hospitals, or schools, and it doesn’t contribute as much to long-term growth.
Economists talk about “bang for the buck” – how much economic stimulus is provided by each dollar of spending.
It’s hard to imagine less bang than from bucks spent on a Nepalese contractor working in Iraq.
With so many dollars going abroad, the American economy should have been in a much weaker shape than it appeared.
In a sense, the strategy worked: a housing bubble fed a consumption boom, as savings rates plummeted to zero.  The economic weaknesses were simply being postponed to some future date; the Bush administration hoped that the day of reckoning would come after November 2008.  Instead, things began to unravel in August 2007.
Now it has responded, with a stimulus package that is too little, too late, and badly designed.
To see the inadequacy of that package, compare it with the more than $1.5 trillion that was borrowed in home equity loans in recent years, most of it spent on consumption.
That game – based on a belief in ever-spiraling home prices – is over. 
With home prices falling (and set to continue to fall), and with banks uncertain of their financial position, lenders will not lend and households will not borrow.
So, while the additional liquidity injected into the financial system by the Fed may have prevented a meltdown, it won’t stimulate much consumption or investment.
Instead, much of it will find its way abroad.
China, for example, is worried that the Fed’s stimulus will increase its domestic inflation. 
There is a third reason that this war is economically bad for America.
Not only has America already spent a great deal on this war – $12 billion a month, and counting – but much of the bill remains to be paid, such as compensation and health care for the 40% of veterans who are returning with disabilities, many of which are very serious.
Moreover, this war has been funded differently from any other war in America’s history –perhaps in any country’s recent history.
Normally, countries ask for shared sacrifice, as they ask their young men and women to risk their lives.
Taxes are raised.
There is a discussion of how much of the burden to pass on to future generations.  In this war, there was no such discussion.
When America went to war, there was a deficit.
Yet remarkably, Bush asked for, and got, a reckless tax cut for the rich.
That means that every dollar of war spending has in effect been borrowed.
For the first time since the Revolutionary War, two centuries ago, America has had to turn to foreigners for financing, because US households have been saving nothing .
The numbers are hard to believe.
The national debt has increased by 50% in eight years, with almost $1 trillion of this increase due to the war – an amount likely to more than double within ten years. 
Who would have believed that one administration could do so much damage so quickly?
America, and the world, will be paying to repair it for decades to come.
Obama’s Year of Iran
PRINCETON – As US President Barack Obama begins his second term, he will have to devote much of his attention to figuring out how to get America’s domestic finances in order.
But foreign-policy issues loom large as well, and, notwithstanding the ongoing conflict in Syria and the possible spread of war across Africa’s Sahel region, the consensus in Washington is that 2013 will be the “year of decision” on Iran.
Obama began his first administration with an offer to engage with the Islamic Republic; as he memorably put it in his first inaugural address in 2009, “We will extend a hand if you are willing to unclench your fist.”
He repeated that commitment, although much more obliquely, in his second inaugural address: “We will show the courage to try and resolve our differences with other nations peacefully – not because we are naive about the dangers we face, but because engagement can more durably lift suspicion and fear.”
As the American scholar and activist Hussein Ibish recently argued, Obama has appointed a cabinet designed to give him maximum room to negotiate a deal with Iran.
In particular, naming military veterans as Secretary of State and Secretary of Defense will provide him with valuable domestic political cover for an agreement that would inevitably require lifting sanctions on Iran and almost certainly recognizing its right to enrich uranium at a low level of concentration.
That should signal to Iran’s rulers not only that the US is serious about a deal, but also that whatever the US offers is likely to be the best deal that they can get.
The Obama administration has assembled an extraordinary coalition of countries to impose economic sanctions that are having a demonstrable effect on the price and availability of goods in Iran and on the ability of even powerful institutions, such as the Revolutionary Guard, to do business.
But coalitions do not hold together forever, and the pain of sanctions often cuts both ways, affecting buyers as well as sellers.
Countries like South Korea and Japan, for example, have curtailed their imports of Iranian oil only reluctantly; countries like China and Russia rarely play straight on sanctions in the first place.
Moreover, Obama can threaten that “all options are on the table” only so many times without losing credibility with the Iranians and other countries in the Middle East.
As Brookings Institution foreign-policy expert Suzanne Maloney points out, countries in the region and beyond are already dismayed at the lack of US leadership concerning Syria.
If the US gives negotiations one more serious try (a credible offer and a genuine willingness to engage), gets rebuffed, and then does nothing, it will effectively declare itself a paper tiger.
At that point, the sanctions coalition will most likely disintegrate amid a much broader loss of confidence in US leadership.
The US has thus painted itself into a corner.
Former US National Security Adviser Zbigniew Brzezinski recently argued strongly against military action, proposing, instead, a strategy that would continue sanctions and extend deterrence.
Like US policy toward the Soviet bloc during the Cold War, “An Iranian military threat aimed at Israel or any other US friend in the Middle East would be treated as if directed at the United States itself and would precipitate a commensurate US response.”
I can certainly see the wisdom in Brzezinski’s approach.
But Obama has marched the US and its allies too far down the current path.
Moreover, and crucially, Brzezinski forgets that Obama’s determination to stop Iran from acquiring a nuclear weapon does not stem only from his concern for Israel’s security or the stability of the wider Middle East.
Obama has repeatedly committed himself to the goal of turning the world in the direction of “global zero” – a world without nuclear weapons.
He believes (as do former Secretaries of State Henry Kissinger and George Shultz, former Secretary of Defense William Perry, and former Senator Sam Nunn) that unless the world finds a way to live without nuclear weapons, we will find ourselves in an international system in which 30-50 states possess them, raising the danger of accidental or deliberate launch to an unacceptably high level.
Convincing great powers to eliminate their nuclear arsenals might seem as politically fanciful as pushing gun-control legislation through the US Congress, but on that issue, too, Obama has made clear that he is willing to try.
However logical or attractive a containment policy might be, and however disastrous the consequences of bombing are likely to be, Obama’s commitment to realizing global denuclearization as part of his legacy implies that he will not allow another country to acquire a nuclear weapon on his watch, as his predecessors allowed India, Israel, North Korea, and Pakistan to do.
Thus, the stakes for both the US and Iran are very high.
Other countries would do well not to underestimate Obama’s resolve; governments that have relations with Iran should emphasize that the time to make a deal is now.
And countries like Turkey and Brazil (and perhaps India and Egypt) could play a useful role by devising face-saving ways for the Iranians to meet the international community’s demands, together with longer-term alternatives for fuel enrichment that would be consistent with reducing the global nuclear threat.
America’s allies, in turn, must be prepared to close ranks with it on both the outlines of a deal and the willingness to strike militarily.
The art of statecraft is not to choose between war and diplomacy as if they were mutually exclusive alternatives, but to understand how they fit together.
In the case of Syria, the West has repeatedly called for diplomacy while ruling out any military action, with predictably bad results.
The US will not make that mistake with Iran.
America the Hypocritical
In commemorating the 230th anniversary of America’s independence last July, President George W. Bush noted that the patriots of the Revolutionary War believed that all men are created equal, and with inalienable rights.
Because of these ideals, he proclaimed, the United States “remains a beacon of hope for all who dream of liberty and a shining example to the world of what a free people can achieve.”
But, at the same time, his administration was holding approximately 400 prisoners at the US Naval Base at Guantánamo Bay in Cuba.
Some of them have now been there for more than five years. None of them has ever been put on trial.
Last month, a highly reputable source confirmed that the Guantánamo prisoners are suffering from more than indefinite detention.
The US Federal Bureau of Investigation released documents showing that an FBI agent witnessed “on several occasions” detainees who were “chained hand and foot in [a] fetal position to [the] floor,” without a chair, or food or water.
In these conditions, “most urinated or defecated on [them]selves.”
They were left there for 18 or 24 hours, or more.
On one of these occasions, the agent reported, “the air conditioning was turned up so low that the barefooted detainee was shaking with cold.”
On another occasion the room was unventilated, the temperature over 100 degrees Fahrenheit, and the detainee was almost unconscious on the floor with a pile of hair next to him – “he had apparently been pulling it out throughout the night.”
Another FBI agent was laughingly told by a civilian contractor, “[Y]ou have to see this.”
He was then taken to an interrogation room where he saw a longhaired man with a full beard who was gagged with duct tape that “covered much of his head.”
When the agent asked how the tape would be removed, he was not given any answer.
Other FBI agents reported seeing prisoners left in shackles for 12 hours or more, again in cold conditions, being subjected to strobe lights and loud rap music for many hours, or being forced to wrap themselves in an Israeli flag.
The FBI report noted these incidents with the comment: “doesn’t seem excessive given Department of Defense policy.”
Several of the detainees told the FBI agents that they had no connection with terrorism and had no idea why they had been abducted and taken to Guantánamo.
Many prisoners were not captured fighting in Afghanistan.
Some were picked up in Bosnia, Indonesia, Thailand, Mauritania, and Pakistan.
The case of Khaled el-Masri, a German citizen of Lebanese descent, appears to be another of these errors.
Seized by the CIA in Macedonia, he was taken to Afghanistan and interrogated for five months before being released without charge.
A German court has now issued arrest warrants for those involved in his abduction.
If there are any human rights at all, the right not to be locked up indefinitely without trial is surely one of them.
The US Constitution’s Bill of Rights puts considerable emphasis on that right, specifying in the Sixth Amendment that in all criminal prosecutions, “the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury” and “to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation; to be confronted with the witnesses against him.”
None of the Guantánamo inmates has been granted these rights.
So it has never been proved, by the standards laid down in the US Constitution that any of them really are terrorists.
But the Sixth Amendment does not apply to the Guantánamo prisoners, because they are not US citizens and are in a facility that, technically, is not part of US territory, although it is under the full control of the US government.
Whatever US courts say about it, abducting people all over the world, locking them up for years without establishing that they are guilty of anything, and subjecting them to harsh and abusive treatment is a flagrant violation of international law.
By any standard of justice, it is also just plain wrong.
Tom Paine, the great American revolutionary and author of The Rights of Man, wrote: “He that would make his own liberty secure must guard even his enemy from oppression; for if he violates this duty he establishes a precedent that will reach himself.”
If America would only follow that advice, it might really be a beacon of hope and a shining example.
But as long as it continues to hold and abuse prisoners without giving them a fair trial, America’s professed ideals will continue to sound to the rest of the world like the deepest hypocrisy.
The State of the United States
NEW YORK – The US presidential election is still more than half a year away, and it is impossible to know with any certainty who will be nominated to represent the major parties, much less who will be the 45th occupant of the White House.
But it is not too soon to assess the mood of the country's more than 320 million inhabitants and what it will mean for the man or woman who ultimately prevails in what must seem to most people around the world to be an endless political soap opera.
The dominant mood in the United States today is one of considerable anxiety, if not outright anger.
The Washington Post recently published a four-part series of articles revealing popular fury aimed at Wall Street, Muslims, trade deals, Washington, police shootings, President Barack Obama, Republicans, immigrants, and other targets.
One of the worst descriptions to be applied to a person nowadays is “professional politician.”
The beneficiaries of this state of mind are anti-establishment candidates who espouse policies in opposition to free trade and immigration reform and who call for a radical overhaul of current tax and spending policies.
The details of what they advocate may well differ, but their platforms share a promise of radical departure from the status quo.
The basis of this mood is hardly self-evident, as the country is better off economically than it was a half-dozen years ago, in the immediate aftermath of the 2007-2008 economic crisis.
Over nine million jobs have been created since then, interest rates are low (making loans for homes and cars more affordable), and the fall in the price of gasoline is the equivalent of a $700 tax cut for the average American family.
Moreover, the stock market has risen some 200% since its low of seven years ago, and millions of people who were without health insurance are now covered.
Yet this good economic news is offset in many cases by weak growth in household incomes, which have stagnated in real (inflation-adjusted) terms for some 15 years.
The percentage of Americans working full time has still not reached the level it was at seven years ago.
And many fear that their jobs will disappear because of foreign competition, new technologies, or outsourcing.
A large number of Americans are living longer, but are anxious, as they have failed to set aside the funds needed to ensure that their retirement will allow them to live comfortably into old age.
Some are paying health-insurance premiums that they previously had avoided because of mandates in the reform enacted under Obama.
There is also the issue of inequality.
This causes real anger, but the problem is not so much inequality (which, though worse, is nothing inherently new) as it is the decline in opportunity.
The American Dream is giving way to class consciousness – a profound change for a country founded on the ideal that anyone can improve his or her lot through hard work.
But the reasons for anxiety and anger transcend economic realities and worries.
There is also physical insecurity, whether because of crime or the fear of terrorism.
In many communities, there is concern, too, about where the culture and the society are heading.
Modern media tend to make things worse.
Ours is an age of “narrowcasting,” not broadcasting.
People increasingly tune in to cable channels or websites that reinforce their views and ideologies.
Little of this is reassuring.
The national mood transcends the election campaign and will pose a real challenge to the new president and Congress.
The divisions within and between the Democratic and Republican parties will make compromise and the formation of coalitions that are essential for governing all but impossible.
Concerns over retirement and health-care affordability will make it that much more difficult to reform entitlements, even though their expansion will drive up the national debt to record levels.
Free trade is blamed for job losses and is losing support, even though it has also been a source of new jobs and greater consumer choice – and has strengthened America’s strategic position around the world.
Immigration, long part of the country’s heritage and a source of valuable talent, is now the object of so much controversy that prospects for reform are dim.
The mood of the US may also intensify officials’ domestic focus.
Already turned off by foreign involvement in the wake of the Iraq and Afghanistan interventions, which cost much more than they achieved, many Americans are skeptical of what the US can accomplish abroad.
They are frustrated with allies seen as not carrying their fair share of common burdens, and they are increasingly convinced that the government needs to focus less on the world and more on fixing what is wrong with the US.
Some in other countries will no doubt read all of this with satisfaction; but, overall, it is bad news for much of the world.
An America that is distracted and divided is less likely to be willing and able to take the lead in promoting stability in the Middle East, Europe, or Asia, or in meeting global challenges.
And, without US leadership, these challenges are likely to go unmet, turning into problems or, worse, crises.
America Wakes Up to Climate Change
After years of debate in the United States, and opposition to action by the Bush administration, America is finally waking up to the reality of global climate change.
Leadership is still not coming from the president, but the private sector has begun to act.
Leaders of major US companies have decided that global man-made climate change is real, must be controlled, and that business must play a constructive part in the process.
Thus, even as the Bush administration and some scientific contrarians pretend that there is no problem, US corporate leaders are seeking practical solutions.
The basic situation has been clear for years.
Global use of fossil fuels is contributing to a sharp rise in atmospheric carbon dioxide, which is causing the Earth to warm.
Rainfall patterns are changing.
Deserts and dry regions are becoming drier.
Extreme weather events such as hurricanes and typhoons are likely to increase.
Flooding in Europe is likely to intensify, a process that may already have begun.
Sea levels are rising, and could climb sharply if global warming leads to a destabilization of the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets.
In short, the scientific evidence is strong and growing that the planet is at grave risk, with many ill effects already being felt and more to come.
The proper responses are also increasingly understood.
We must move to a sustainable energy system, one that does not mean a huge increase of carbon in the atmosphere.
This will require a shift to renewable energy sources such as solar power, and perhaps nuclear power, as well as new technologies to capture carbon dioxide at power plants and then to dispose of the carbon dioxide in safe underground deposits.
Society will have to pay a price for these investments in new energy technologies, but the benefits will be vastly greater than the price.
The US is the world’s major emitter of carbon dioxide from energy use, but it has done the least among all major economies to confront the global challenge.
The Bush administration claims that more research is needed before any action is taken.
Yet real action in the US is starting, thanks to leadership in other parts of the world, and thanks to the enlightened understanding of some major American businesses.
First, the rest of the world ratified the Kyoto Protocol to control emissions of carbon dioxide.
At the beginning of this year, Europe introduced a new Greenhouse Gas Emissions Trading Scheme that uses market-based incentives to control carbon emissions.
American companies operating in Europe are part of that system for their European-based emissions, so that US companies are being pulled into climate control even if their own government avoids the issue.
Second, major US investors, such as pension fund managers, are realizing that US companies that fail to control their emissions may be vulnerable to financial losses in the future.
They know that, sooner or later, the US will have to join the rest of the world in controlling climate change.
At that point, power companies that use antiquated technologies that emit massive amounts of greenhouse gases may face serious financial losses.
So investors are telling companies to report their carbon emissions today in order to assess future liabilities.
Similarly, many company bosses know that pretending that climate problems do not exist is bad for shareholders, because reality will one day strike.
They know that investing today in clean technologies can give them a long-term competitive advantage.
As a result, many companies are taking steps now to limit their emissions to avoid future financial liabilities and a lack of investor confidence.
The most dramatic breakthrough of this kind occurred when General Electric, one of the world’s most important, innovative, and respected companies, announced that it was going “green” with a major new corporate focus on environmentally sound technologies and a commitment to limit its own greenhouse gas emissions.
With GE’s leadership, which it termed “ecomagination” (combining ecology with imagination), many US businesses are sure to follow.
It is too early to count on success in engaging the US on climate change.
The Bush administration continues to delay and to avoid sound science.
Yet it is reasonably clear that a tipping point has been reached.
Reality is catching up with the US, as it already has elsewhere in the world.
As US citizens and businesses continue to suffer the results of climate change – heat waves, droughts, hurricanes, and floods – more and more Americans, including an increasing number of business leaders, will press America’s political leaders for real action.
The solutions will not be easy, and the effort must last over many decades in all parts of the world.
But the effort needs to start now.
As with Europe’s new carbon trading, all producers and consumers around the globe will need to face market incentives to adopt technologies and consumption patterns that slow (and eventually stop) the increase of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.
We will all need to pay a “market price” when we contribute to global climate change, so that we give true economic incentives to sustainable energy systems and new public investments – for example, mass transit – that reduce greenhouse gas emissions and thereby head off future climatic disasters.
The Right Weights for Mortgage Risks
ABU DHABI – Ever since hunter-gatherers started to build their own dwellings some 14,000 years ago, homeownership has been a mark of high social and economic status.
Today, the United States has built a mammoth financial bureaucracy to promote homeownership, and economists, bankers, politicians, and of course homeowners themselves keenly follow house-price indicators.
But, as we have recently witnessed, unless mortgage risks are properly calculated, the dream of homeownership can all too easily become an economic nightmare.
Mortgage debt has become households’ biggest liability throughout the developed world.
In the decade preceding the financial crisis, US mortgage debt increased almost threefold, while the real economy grew by only one-third.
At its 2007 peak, US mortgage debt stood at $10.6 trillion – more than double the combined GDP of China and India.
The six major banking crises in the advanced economies since the mid-1970s were all associated with a housing bust.
A real-estate price crash has also been a key cause of emerging-market crises, such as the 1997-98 Asian collapse.
Research shows that lost output during recessions accompanied by a housing bust is double or triple what it might otherwise have been had real-estate prices held up.
Moreover, housing busts tend to prolong recessions by almost three years.
Given the enormous social and economic costs when high levels of mortgage debt meet a crash in house prices, one would expect regulators to be fully engaged on the issue.
Unfortunately, they are not.
Although the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, the primary global benchmark for bank regulations, proposed reforms after the 2008 crisis that are aimed at strengthening the financial system, mortgage regulations have changed little.
The key to mortgage regulation is the concept of “risk weight,” a measure that increases with the probability that a borrower will default.
For example, a loan to AAA-rated Microsoft has a 0% risk weight, meaning that it is virtually risk-free.
A loan to the Indian government will have a risk weight of 50%, and one to a riskier Argentina will be weighted at 150%.
When it comes to mortgages, the standard risk weight is 35% (down from 50% a decade ago).
But banks can use internal mathematical models to calculate their own risk weights.
This is akin to marking one’s own exam paper; unsurprisingly, banks’ risk scores are usually on the safe side.
Consider, for example, a $200,000 bank loan to buy a $235,000 home.
If the bank attaches a 10% risk weight to the loan, the risk-weighted equivalent is $20,000.
If the amount of bank capital needed to protect that risk-weighted equivalent is 10%, then the bank requires just $2,000 of its own capital to fund the mortgage, $198,000 of which the bank itself borrows.
All it takes to wipe out the bank’s own money is a 16% drop in the house’s price (from $235,000 to below $198,000).
US house prices – as measured by the S&amp;P/Case-Shiller National Home Price Index – fell by more than 30% from June 2006 to March 2009, while European countries, including Spain, Ireland, and the United Kingdom, experienced similar or greater declines.
The problem is that banks continue to offer big mortgages while having little of their own “skin in the game.”
The IMF estimates that the average mortgage risk weight in Europe and Asia was 14% and 15%, respectively, with some banks using a risk weight as low as 6%.
Recently, some regulators have become suspicious of banks’ do-it-yourself risk weights.
In 2012, the UK authorities asked banks to apply a temporary minimum 15% risk weight to their mortgage portfolios, though that guidance expired in July.
The Swedish regulator has recommended that mortgage lenders raise their risk-weight floor from 15% to 25%.
Although welcome, these steps may still be too little; more important, they lack flexibility.
A better option would be to implement time-varying, pro-cyclical floors, forcing banks to hold more capital during housing booms.
And, whereas a single, fixed floor might push banks toward riskier loans that offer higher returns for the same amount of capital, a dynamic system would allow lower floors for the lowest-risk mortgages and require higher floors for riskier loans.
Moreover, while risk weight is an important macro-prudential lever, it must be used in conjunction with regulators’ other tools.
These include mortgage eligibility criteria, such as loan-to-value and loan-to-income ratios, and dynamic provisioning (that is increasing banks’ mandatory loan-loss reserves during housing booms).
It is important to calibrate the impact of risk weights on housing-market cycles relative to other measures, not least because excessive and overlapping intervention could itself fuel dangerous cycles.
The reliance of modern banking regulation on risk weighting is nowhere more important than in the mortgage market.
If regulators get it wrong, the entire edifice could collapse – yet again.
The views expressed in this column are the author’s own, and do not represent those of the National Bank of Abu Dhabi.
Hardening Brazil’s Soft Power
BRASILIA – It is, perhaps, a truism for Brazil’s citizens that their country is and always will be a peaceful one.
After all, Brazil has lived with its ten neighbors without conflict for almost 150 years, having settled its borders through negotiation.
It last went to war in 1942, after direct aggression by Nazi U-boats in the South Atlantic.
It has forsworn nuclear weapons, having signed a comprehensive nuclear-safeguards agreement with Argentina and the International Atomic Energy Agency.
Through the Common Market of the South (Mercosur) and the Union of South American Nations (Unasur), Brazil is helping to integrate the region politically, economically, socially, and culturally.
But is soft power enough for one of the world’s major emerging countries?
To be sure, Brazil’s peaceful foreign policy has served it well.
Brazil has used its stature to advance peace and cooperation in South America and beyond.
Its constructive stance derives from a worldview that accords pride of place to the values of democracy, social justice, economic development, and environmental protection.
Brazil’s unique approach to promoting these ideals is an important source of its soft power, reflected in the broad international support that placed Brazilians atop international institutions like the Food and Agriculture Organization and the World Trade Organization.
Yet no country can rely on soft power alone to defend its interests.
Indeed, in an unpredictable world, where old threats are compounded by new challenges, policymakers cannot disregard hard power.
By deterring threats to national sovereignty, military power supports peace; and, in Brazil’s case, it underpins our country’s constructive role in the pursuit of global stability.
That role is more necessary than ever.
Over the past two decades, unilateral actions in disregard of the UN Security Council’s primary responsibility in matters of war and peace have led to greater uncertainty and instability.
Likewise, little progress toward nuclear disarmament has been made, in disregard of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
Brazil’s abundance of energy, food, water, and biodiversity increases its stake in a security environment characterized by rising competition for access to, or control of, natural resources.
In order to meet the challenges of this complex reality, Brazil’s peaceful foreign policy must be supported by a robust defense policy.
Brazil’s National Defense Strategy, updated in 2012, states that the modernization of the Armed Forces is intrinsically linked to national development.
Thus, it emphasizes the need to strengthen the domestic defense industry.
In accordance with the Strategy, Brazil is enhancing its conventional deterrence capabilities, including by building a nuclear-propelled submarine as part of a naval program commensurate with its responsibilities in the South Atlantic.
Brazil coordinates closely on defense matters with its neighbors, both bilaterally and through Unasur’s South American Defense Council, which aims to promote confidence-building, transparency, a joint regional defense industry, and, most important, a common defense identity.
One potential mechanism for advancing these objectives is a South American Defense College, now under consideration.
South America is becoming a region where war is unthinkable – what the political scientist Karl Deutsch once called a “security community.”
Having visited every South American country in my tenure as Defense Minister, I am convinced that, the most effective deterrent on the continent is cooperation.
At the same time, Brazil is pursuing increased bilateral defense cooperation with African partners.
With our neighbors on both shores of the South Atlantic, Brazil is working closely to strengthen the Zone of Peace and Cooperation of the South Atlantic (ZPCSA), which aims to keep the ocean free from rivalries foreign to it and from nuclear weapons.
Brazil is also reaching out to other emerging countries, such as its fellow BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa) and members of the IBSA Dialogue Forum (India, Brazil, and South Africa).
For example, Brazil conducts IBSAMAR, a regular trilateral naval exercise, with South Africa and India.
More broadly, we are exploring ways to cooperate in the joint development of defense technologies.
Through such endeavors, Brazil hopes to contribute to a more balanced international order, one less subject to hegemonies of any kind, without losing sight of the importance of mutually beneficial partnerships with developed countries.
Even as Brazil hardens its soft power, it remains deeply committed to the path of dialogue, conflict prevention, and the negotiated settlement of disputes.
The presence of Brazilian peacekeepers in countries like Haiti and Lebanon underscores Brazil’s contribution to maintaining peace and security worldwide.
In the twenty-first century, a truly stable global order will depend on a legitimate and effective UN Security Council, one that reflects the plurality of the emerging multipolar world.
China Grows Down
HONG KONG – For more than three decades, China’s GDP has grown by an average of more than 10% annually.
But former Premier Wen Jiabao rightly described this impressive growth performance as “unstable, unbalanced, uncoordinated, and unsustainable,” highlighting the many economic, social, and environmental costs and challenges that have accompanied it.
Now China must choose between the export-based, investment-driven growth model of the past and a new, more viable economic order.
Cheap credit and perverse incentives – such as promotions for officials who contribute most to GDP growth – have led to massive but redundant investment, which, in turn, has contributed to excess capacity in manufacturing and infrastructure.
This model is not only inefficient; channeling government resources to support investment also undermines China’s social development.
Given this, China’s leaders have decided to stop using GDP growth as the primary criterion for evaluating officials’ performance.
Indeed, the 12th Five-Year Plan, which extends until 2015, aims to shift China’s economy to a new, more sustainable growth model based on quality and innovation, and accepts that annual GDP growth will likely fall to 7% during the transition.
Most discussion of growth models nowadays is based on work by the Nobel laureate Robert Solow.
For Solow, GDP growth is determined by the factor inputs of land, labor, and capital, together with the economy’s total factor productivity (TFP, or the change in output not accounted for by changes in the volume of inputs, but by factors like technological innovation and institutional reform).
Since 1978, China, by implementing major reforms, has achieved three periods of high TFP growth, each lasting 5-7 years.
First, in the early 1980’s, following the introduction of the rural household-responsibility system, which boosted agricultural productivity and released a large amount of unskilled labor to work in the higher-productivity urban and industrial sectors, annual TFP growth accelerated to 3-4%.
The second such period followed Deng Xiaoping’s southern tour in 1992, during which he emphasized the need to shift to a market-based – albeit state-controlled – system by opening China’s economy to foreign direct investment and establishing special economic zones to help develop export-oriented industries.
This time, TFP growth soared to 5-6%, partly owing to the “catching up” process facilitated by China’s adoption of foreign technology and know-how.
Finally, after major reforms of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and the tax system, China acceded to the World Trade Organization in 2001. With the country fully integrated into global supply chains, TFP growth hit 4%, where it remained until 2007.
Since then, however, the TFP growth rate has fallen by almost half.
Indeed, China’s economy has experienced a significant – and ongoing – growth slowdown in the wake of the global economic crisis that erupted five years ago.
By 2012, human capital’s contribution to China’s GDP growth fell almost to zero, with fixed-capital accumulation accounting for roughly 60% of total growth.
Large-scale, debt-funded capital investments have raised the country’s credit/GDP ratio to nearly 200%, increasing the financial system’s vulnerability – a development reflected in the recent spike in interbank interest rates.
In order to achieve more balanced and sustainable GDP growth, China’s leaders must implement a set of deep, comprehensive, and long-lasting institutional reforms aimed at boosting TFP.
In particular, the reforms should be designed to facilitate China’s transition from its traditional supply-based growth model, which assumes that building hard infrastructure leads automatically to demand growth.
In fact, GDP growth may be slowing precisely because existing investment in manufacturing and infrastructure, undertaken largely by local governments and SOEs, does not match the pattern of domestic demand.
As a result, China now faces the problem of short-term excess capacity.
Improving the quality of GDP growth will depend on Chinese leaders’ willingness to enact market-oriented reforms.
Rather than directly driving investment, the state must emphasize its regulatory and enforcement functions, including setting and overseeing standards, building an effective property-rights infrastructure, and managing macroeconomic conditions.
At the same time, the state must improve the quality and delivery of education, health care, and security, while minimizing corruption and administrative abuses.
In short, China must shift its focus from meeting GDP growth targets to creating an environment that fosters innovation and competition, thereby enabling market forces to set prices and allocate resources more effectively.
The state would thus become an intermediary agent, facilitating the development of a sustainable economic order in which less is more – that is, a system in which less intervention creates more opportunities for creativity.
SOEs undoubtedly played an important role in China’s previous growth model, delivering the infrastructure and services that were deemed necessary for the global manufacturing supply chain to function.
But access to cheap credit from state-controlled banks creates an incentive for SOEs to generate surplus capacity, which increases systemic risk in the economy.
To correct China’s excess-capacity problem would require the relevant enterprises, whether SOEs or private firms, to exit the market.
Unless China’s leaders implement major structural reforms aimed at establishing a market-based growth model, they will be unable to avoid the “middle-income trap” that has prevented so many developing economies from attaining advanced-country status.
The deceleration in GDP growth that such reforms would cause would be more than offset by increased market dynamism and overall economic stability.
A Murder in Moscow
It is time to end the fiction that Vladimir Putin’s “dictatorship of law” has made postcommunist Russia any less lawless.
The murder of Anna Politkovskaya, one of Russia’s bravest and best journalists, a woman who dared to expose the brutal murders committed by Russian troops in Chechnya, is final proof that President Putin has delivered nothing more than a run of the mill dictatorship with the usual contempt for law.
This recognition is a timely one for the world to make, particularly Europe.
Germany’s Foreign Ministry is preparing a policy on Russian/German relations that will enshrine indifference to Putin’s lawlessness as being in the national interest of the most powerful member of the European Union.
But indifference becomes appeasement when it encourages Putin to pursue his lawless ways in the international arena, as in his current campaign to strangle Georgia’s economy.
The killing of Politkovskaya has incited an eerie sense of déjà vu : just as in the KGB’s heyday, people simply disappear in Putin’s Russia.
Politkovskaya’s is the third politically tinged killing in three weeks.
Enver Ziganshin, the chief engineer of BP Russia, was shot to death in Irkutsk on September 30.
Andrei Kozlov, the deputy governor of Russia’s central bank who was leading a campaign against financial fraud, was assassinated on September 14.
The fact that Russia’s Prosecutor General Yuri Chaika, took over the investigation into Politkovskaya’s killing, as he did with the murder of Kozlov, doesn’t inspire hope, as such senior level involvement would in any real democracy.
In fact, the involvement of the highest level of Russia’s government is almost a guarantee that the killers will never be found.
Politkovskaya’s murder is a particularly grim augury when you consider that she was a powerful critic of Russia’s President.
In her articles for one of the few remaining independent papers in Moscow,
I am not accusing Putin’s government of the contract killing of Politkovskaya.
After all, as a campaigning investigative journalist she made many people angry besides Putin, not least of which is the current Chechen Prime Minister, Ramzan Kadyrov, whom she accused of a policy of kidnapping for ransom.
But even if Vladimir Putin’s associates had nothing to do with Politkovskaya being gunned down in an elevator of her apartment building in the center of Moscow, his contempt for law created the climate in which the murder was carried out.
Like the murder of Archbishop Thomas Beckett in his Canterbury Cathedral many centuries ago, the crime was committed in the clear belief that it would please the king.
Given what Politkovskaya represented—the responsibility of a democratic press to question the Kremlin and its policies—the government should have made certain that nothing bad happened to her.
Putin’s Russia has already lost 12 leading journalists to murder in the past six years.
None of those crimes has been solved, which would not be the case if Putin’s “dictatorship of law” was anything more than a PR strategy.
The six year period since Vladimir Putin arrived in the Kremlin has been a time of deeply conflicting signals.
On one hand, the world sees a young, educated leader pledging to modernize Russia, particularly in terms of bringing its law enforcement and judicial practices into line with international norms.
On the other, the president watches in silence while his ex-colleagues in Russia's FSB security service (the former KGB) provide no security to those murdered, and launch a series of notorious espionage cases against journalists, scientists, and environmental activists.
These “neo-spies” include journalist Gregory Pasko, arms control expert Igor Sutyagin, diplomat Valentin Moiseyev, physicist Valentin Danilov, and others.
The supposedly civilizing influence of being a Western partner — chairing a G-8 summit in Saint Petersburg for example — seems to have been lost on Putin’s Kremlin cabal.
Once again exposure to Western values has delivered another Potemkin Village; Russia presents a façade of laws and democratic institutions, but behind that cardboard surface the same arbitrary brutes rule.
The danger for the world is that Putin’s lawlessness is being exported.
Across Russia’s near abroad, a form of criminalized diplomacy is taking root.
Look at Putin’s attempt to rig Ukraine’s previous presidential election, and the on again off again criminal charges brought against the opposition leader Yuliya Tymoshenko.
Look at the rogue breakaway regions in Moldova and Georgia that exist only because of the Kremlin’s backing.
Look at how the Kremlin seeks to blackmail its neighbors by threatening their energy supplies.
Every policeman knows that when you ignore criminal behavior, criminals grow bolder.
It is past time for the world to recognize Vladimir Putin for what he is: a man who is taking Russia back into the shadows.
So the world must now ponder that old Latin maxim qui tacet consentere videtur – silence means consent – and ask itself if it is wise to quietly consent to Putin’s construction of a lawless energy superpower.
An Accidental Cure for Iraq
Doctors use the word “crisis” to describe the point at which a patient either starts to recover or dies.
President George W. Bush’s Iraqi patient now seems to have reached that point.
Most commentators appear to think that Bush’s latest prescription – a surge of 20,000 additional troops to suppress the militias in Baghdad – will, at best, merely postpone the inevitable death of his dream of a democratic Iraq.
Yet as “Battle of Baghdad” begins, factors beyond Bush’s control and not of his making (at least not intentionally) may just save Iraq from its doom.
One key factor is that, for the first time since the United States and Britain invaded Iraq, Arab Sunni leaders are backing a US military plan for that country.
These Sunni leaders live in abject fear of the geopolitical earthquake that any disintegration of political authority in Baghdad would bring, believing that all-out civil war would invariably follow – a war that would not respect international borders.
Of course, America has been encouraging Sunni leaders in this belief.
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice’s recent tour of Middle East capitals helped spread the word to Egypt, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, and the Gulf states that any US failure and sudden withdrawal would be certain to destabilize them.
Given the fragile grip that these leaders have over their societies, America’s warnings have been taken to heart.
But the truly curious factor that might bring success to Bush is that those who have opposed or resented America’s presence in Iraq, such as the Iranian-backed Shi’a parties now also appear to want Bush’s new strategy to succeed.
They are for it because they believe it will defang Moqtada al-Sadr, the rogue Shi’a cleric whose power has mushroomed over the past three years – to the point that he now dominates much of Baghdad and holds the allegiance of countless angry young Shi’a men.
Of course, attacking Moqtada al-Sadr’s Mahdi Army in the name of fighting militia death squads has the potential to draw American military forces into a level of urban warfare unseen since the Falluja assaults of 2004 and 2005.
Al-Sadr is seen as the protector of the Shi’a of Iraq and has are an estimated 60,000 fighters in his militia.
But he is deeply mistrusted by other Shi’a leaders, who fear that they may one day have to take him on by themselves.
Better to let the Americans do it, though of course these Shi’a leaders prefer a slow strangulation of al-Sadr to a direct and bloody assault.
But make no mistake: how al-Sadr is handled is the big test of Bush’s new strategy.
Should the US choose to face al-Sadr and his forces head on, they risk alienating Iraq’s largest sectarian community, the Shi’a, adding fuel to the anti-occupation resistance and thus probably dooming Bush to failure.
Iran and Syria, which have played a spoiler role in Iraq up to now, may also now be anxious to find a way to pull the country back from the brink.
Bush still refuses to talk to either of them, and has lately been having US troops arrest Iranian agents in Iraq.
Yet Iran may already see itself as victorious, with the current Iraqi government friendlier than any the Iranians have ever known.
So maintaining that government in office has now become a strategic priority for Iran, particularly as it is now clear that any US hopes of using Iraq as a permanent military base are dead. 
The “surge” also opens, perhaps for the first time, a serious possibility of pouring water on the insurgent fires in Anbar province, the heartland of the Sunni insurgency.
The US has achieved relative successes in the province through alliances with Sunni tribes.
The hope is that such realistic and pragmatic accommodations will be extended to Iraqis who are fighting under the banner of a nationalist and anti-occupation agenda.
So some of the stars have come into alignment for Bush.
But to keep them there in the long term, the Iraqi government will need to amend the constitution in a way that appeases the Sunni community.
Reassuring Iraq’s Sunnis that they have a place in the new Iraq will also reassure neighboring Sunni governments, which have mostly turned a blind eye to the support for the insurgency that has come from their lands.
Of course, should the US see failure ahead, it could seek to broaden the war beyond Iraq’s borders by attacking Iran, a policy reminiscent of “Operation Sideshow,” when US failure in Vietnam in the late 1960’s enticed President Nixon into attacking Cambodia and Laos.
But Iran has resources that Cambodia and Laos could never muster; indeed, its ability to retaliate could set the entire region ablaze.
Whereas America’s war in Indochina was a tragic mistake, the cost of a wider war precipitated by the crisis in Iraq would be incomparably greater – for both the patient and the doctor.
An Agenda for Growth in Europe
A recent OECD study reminds us, once again, that per capita income levels are roughly 30% lower in the euro area, as well as in the three largest Continental countries – France, Germany, and Italy – that dominate its performance, than in the United States.
That gap is likely to widen as Europe’s demographic profile darkens, and if productivity continues to grow more slowly than elsewhere in the industrial economies.
Why have the large European economies failed to catch up with US income levels?
The bulk of the shortfall is due to less intensive use of labor: employment rates for women and for the oldest and youngest age groups are lower in the euro area than in the US, working hours are far fewer, and, least significantly, unemployment rates are higher.
Some take consolation from this, viewing it as positive that Europeans prefer leisure to work.
But low levels of labor utilization are largely due to heavier income taxes and social security contributions, as well as high social benefit levels introduced at a time when the labor force was growing rapidly and the need to replace involuntary with voluntary unemployment seemed more urgent than today.
These measures will need to be revisited both to increase the supply of labor and to make public finances more sustainable.
This process is already underway, particularly in Italy and France, through cuts in social security contributions for lower-paid workers, tighter conditions for drawing unemployment benefits, and tax credits for “the working poor.”
Since the mid-1990’s, the relative decline in employment in these countries has, indeed, been slightly reversed.
But factors beyond taxes and benefits also contribute to low employment rates in all the three major euro-zone economies: high minimum wages and some features of employment protection legislation slow down the flow of workers through the job market.
Although a long agenda of reforms is beginning to be tackled, first in Germany and, more recently and cautiously, in France, the results are slow in coming and public understanding of the need for change remains limited.
Much can be learned from each country’s experience and from that of smaller EU member states, but labor market reforms inevitably have a strong national flavor.
Employment objectives have been formulated for all EU member states since 1997 in the so-called European Employment Strategy (EES), now part of the “Lisbon Agenda,” the set of goals established to boost EU productivity.
But, with the policy instruments for achieving these goals largely national and the arguments for applying them simultaneously in several member states weak, the EES has created unrealistic public expectations and triggered only limited action by governments.
Nor is the employment gap with the US the only problem for Europe.
Beginning in the mid-1990’s, the rate of growth in output per hour worked – a key factor behind the rise in per capita income – slowed in most European countries while it rose in the US, reversing a decades-long pattern.
Between 2000 and 2004, hourly labor productivity rose more than twice as fast in the US than in the large euro zone economies – 2.8% per year versus little more than 1%.
So why have the Europeans been unable to sustain improvements in both foundations of growth – employment and productivity – at the same time?
This proved possible not only in the US, but also in other advanced economies outside Europe – Australia, Canada, and New Zealand – and, unsurprisingly, in the new EU member states.
The explanation is not capital spending, which is normally linked to productivity growth.
There have been no major differences between the US and the large euro zone economies here.
This leaves the “explanation” to what economists call Total Factor Productivity (TFP), a mix of several important elements, including innovation activity, a well-functioning financial system ready and willing to take risks, and organizational flexibility that facilitates rapid diffusion of new technologies.
The main lapse in TFP growth in Europe over the past decade has been in services (excluding information and communications technologies).
So deregulation and integration of services will be essential if the Euro area’s TFP is to improve, as more than two-thirds of total income in most EU economies is generated in this sector.
While product markets have held center stage in the creation of the single European market, services continue to be fragmented by national regulatory, anti-competitive practices.
Much of the explanation lies in the very heterogeneity of services and the greater difficulties that mutual recognition, or the “country-of-origin principle” – essential in the integration of product markets – implies for services.
Unfortunately, reform was derailed in 2005.
During the referendum campaign in France preceding the vote on the draft EU Constitutional Treaty, the proposed directive was vilified as undermining the rights of labor, symbolized by that dreaded bogeyman, the “Polish plumber.”
These attacks overlooked the fact that the directive makes employment conditions of workers from other EU-member states subject in most respects to host-country rules.
A revised version of the directive that reduces its sectoral scope and makes a number of compromises with the country-of-origin principle is now before the European Parliament.
Even this limited version would constitute progress; most of the gains arise from removing the red tape that complicates cross-border establishment of small and medium-size service enterprises and limits competition in broad sectors of the economy.
It is a sad reflection on the state of the EU that it seems unable to agree on the one clear productivity-advancing piece of legislation when improving productivity is held out as a shared goal.
The failure to mobilize consumer interests in favor of European integration is particularly disappointing for the new member states, which had expected to reap some of the benefits.
An Alliance of Civilizations?
MADRID – The first International Forum of the Alliance of Civilizations, conceived as an antidote to the idea that the world is doomed to a “clash of civilizations,” recently met in Madrid and revealed that there is more than a grain of truth in Robert Kagan’s idea that Americans are from Mars and Europeans from Venus.
Ever since September 11, 2001, the United States has been engaged in a crusade against the forces of evil in the Muslim world.
By contrast, the March 11, 2004, terrorist attack on Spain, which left 200 dead, triggered an “anti-crusade” that seeks to disarm extremism by building bridges of understanding and reconciliation with Islam.
Co-sponsored by Spain and Turkey, the Alliance of Civilizations initiative is not devoid of political calculation.
To the Spaniards, it helps to justify their abrupt withdrawal from Iraq in 2004; for the Turks, it is yet another vehicle in their struggle, as the vital bridge between Islam and the West, for admission into the European Union.
A loose and somewhat confused project, the Alliance of Civilizations aims to heal the wounds of conflict between Islam and the West through education, viable integration policies, and a better-informed dialogue with the media.
But it suffers from the major global players’ profound skepticism, with the US, Russia, and, for that matter, the EU shown no real enthusiasm for it.
However vague, the alliance of civilizations idea certainly cannot do more harm than war against Islamic extremism.
After all, none of the Muslim world’s problems and conflicts with the West are susceptible to a military solution.
Moreover, the Alliance is not an entirely incoherent proposal if the objective is that the West disengage from the politics of hubris and establish a genuine sphere of cooperation with the Muslim world in economics, culture, and science.
Of course, the idea is held back by the inner workings of both parts of the proposed alliance.
Many in the West question whether Islam is compatible with human rights and Western concepts of liberty.
Many Muslims who have been fighting for years for  their countries’ modernization have so far failed to find a lucid response to the progressive wave of radical Islam.
To claim that Islam is incompatible with human rights is to consider it a civilization too hidebound to change.
This is a historic fallacy.
Nor is the claim that Islam is intrinsically inimical to innovation viable, because Muslim civilization has contributed mightily to science and art throughout history.
Today, Western universities are replete with distinguished Arab scholars in almost every field – the result of a brain drain that itself reflects the Islamic world’s centuries of decline.
In 2005, the 17 countries of the Arab world together produced 13,444 scientific publications, fewer than the 15,455 achieved by Harvard University alone.
Enemies of reason, however, are also to be found in the West.
We live in an age in which many people are disillusioned with secular politics, and are turning to religion instead, not only throughout the Muslim world, but in the core of Western civilization, Christian Europe and Evangelist America.
Nor is the Jewish state of Israel, where Messianic fanatics and religious nationalists have embraced a political theology that questions the very legitimacy of the democratic institutions, immune from this phenomenon.
The current crisis of Islam might not be congenital, but Islam’s predicament is acute.
The question is this: are Muslims ready to accept that Khomeini’s dictum that “Islam is politics or it is nothing” is wrong, that Islam is a religion and not a form of government, and that, as in the Christian world, there is a sphere for Caesar and a sphere for God?
Those in the Muslim world who want to embrace reform must be driven by the conviction that theocracy has never served as a vehicle for human progress.
Of course, the Alliance of Civilizations should not attempt to bridge differences by defending moral relativism.
If it is driven by a Western guilt complex that assumes that the solution simply lies in greater empathy for the Muslim predicament, then the skeptics are bound to be vindicated.
For the Alliance of Civilizations to have any chance of success, the emphasis must be on reciprocity.
Tolerance and religious freedom must be mutual.
Islam’s part in the deal must include a guarantee of human rights and civil liberties, improvement in women’s status, and realistic policies to stem the Islamic world’s demographic explosion.
Some, as usual, will claim that the Arab-Israeli conflict lies at the root of the problems that exist between Islam and the West, and that resolving the Palestinians’ plight will contribute immensely to smoother relations.
But Arabs and Muslims must stop deluding themselves that the Israel-Palestine dispute is what is holding them back.
Ending the American occupation in Iraq and imposing an Arab-Israeli peace would help, but they are no panacea.
The fight to eradicate misery, illiteracy, and corruption, and Islam’s embrace of science, do not depend on the results of the Middle East peace process.
An Alliance of Equals
PARIS – During NATO’s recent 60th anniversary ceremony in Strasbourg, the Alliance welcomed two new members, Albania and Croatia, bringing its total membership to 28.
This expansion is a good thing, for history has tormented these two countries.
Being welcomed within the great international family of the West will reassure them, stabilize them, and contribute to their political, cultural, and economic development.
But the good news was limited, because NATO addressed only a routine agenda.
No core problem was really tackled.
The controversy that arose in France over the country’s return to NATO’s unified military command makes this abundantly clear.
Was France losing its autonomy, perhaps even its sovereignty?
Was it capitulating to American hegemony?
These are real questions, yet at the NATO summit people spoke of them more in terms of symbols than as realities.
But what is the reality here?
NATO is a military alliance composed of 28 countries.
One of them, the United States, has a military budget that is more than three times that of all the other members combined.
Hence, the US runs most NATO civilian and military commands with the consent of the others.
Of course, there is a collective consultation and deliberative process that enables any member to be heard.
But in reality a member’s actual power is what affects common decisions.
This structure harks back to the conditions of NATO’s birth, when it was forged to thwart the Soviet threat to Western civilization.
At the time, no one ever doubted that American power – already endowed with nuclear weapons – was the only counterpart.
For this reason, the US came to preside over the alliance.
During the 41 years of the Cold War, 14 of NATO’s 16 members strictly obeyed and complied with American decisions and policies.
French President Charles de Gaulle was the only one to question whether an American president would actually ever be ready to launch a nuclear attack on the USSR in order to protect one or several Alliance members if vital US interests were not directly at stake.
Based on that doubt, France – a nuclear power since 1960 – withdrew in 1966 from the Alliance’s permanent centralized military command in order to assert its own deterrent capability.
This decision was mainly grounded on the American doctrine, adopted in 1962, of “flexible response,” which said to the Soviets: “As long as you do not use nuclear weapons, we will not use them, either.”
This very doctrine left Europe exposed.
Indeed, while it is a much disputed question, de Gaulle was probably right about America’s lack of commitment to the nuclear defense of Europe.
Both Henry Kissinger and Robert McNamara left office admitting that de Gaulle had been correct.
Nevertheless, de Gaulle’s insights left a legacy that still causes some mistrust and dissent within NATO.
France was right on this key strategic point, but it was never able to explain its position to its allies.
This inability to discuss, clearly and forthrightly, this strategic doctrine continues to hamper the Alliance.
At the Strasbourg summit, confidence in the future could have been strengthened if a couple of troubling issues had been discussed.
Instead, once again, there was an extended focus on the past.
The key questions are whether NATO’s doctrine of common defense is currently directed at one country in particular, and whether nuclear force remains the Alliance’s major defensive tool.
In the current global situation, no predictable conflict will require the use of a nuclear weapon.
At the moment, there is no global threat and the Alliance only intervenes in regional conflicts, so why not have NATO admit this?
But the most important matter that went unmentioned in Strasbourg is the relationship with Russia.
NATO was founded to confront the threat that the USSR represented 60 years ago.
But the Warsaw Pact, the Soviet Union’s “anti-NATO” alliance of socialist countries, was dissolved in 1991; communism imploded the same year, with Russia caught ever since in a struggle to build a market economy and define a new global position for itself.
At a time when Russia was taking a more pacific course, NATO – unlike the Warsaw Pact – was not dismantled.
The only way to resolve this problem is for NATO to assert its pacific intentions before the world.
The most convincing way to do that is to moderate America’s excessive taste for power, which it demonstrated in Iraq.
NATO needs to shift its focus from organizing and administering a unified military command to building real confidence that every member’s voice will be heard.
To that end, all members must stand on an equal footing.
France’s decision to return to full and equal Alliance membership was a good one, and France must now work from within to advance the principles in which it believes.
Avoiding a New American Recession
CAMBRIDGE – The United States may be headed for a recession in 2013.
Even if the country avoids going over the “fiscal cliff,” a poorly designed political compromise that cuts the deficit too quickly could push an already weak economy into recession.
But a gradual phase-in of an overall cap on tax deductions and exclusions (so-called tax expenditures), combined with reform of entitlement spending, could achieve the long-run fiscal consolidation that America needs without risking a new recession.
The US economy has been limping along with a growth rate of less than 2% during the past year, with similarly dim prospects in 2013, even without the shock of the fiscal cliff.&#160; That is much too weak a pace of expansion to tolerate the fiscal cliff’s increase in tax rates and spending cuts, which would reduce demand by a total of $600 billion – about 4% of GDP – next year, and by larger sums in subsequent years.
President Barack Obama’s proposed alternative to the fiscal cliff would substantially increase tax rates and limit tax deductions for the top 2% of earners, who now pay more than 45% of total federal personal-income taxes.
His budget would also increase taxes on corporations, and would end the current payroll-tax “holiday,” imposing an additional 2% tax on all wage earners.
Together, these changes could lower total demand by nearly 2% of GDP.
And the higher marginal tax rates would reduce incentives to work and to invest, further impeding economic activity.
All of that could be fateful for an economy that is still struggling to sustain a growth rate of less than 2%.
The Congressional Budget Office and the Federal Reserve predict that going over the fiscal cliff would cause a recession in 2013, with Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke recently saying that the Fed would be unable to offset the adverse effect on the economy.
He could have said the same thing about the fiscal drag that would be created by Obama’s budget proposal.
Although Congressional Republicans rightly object to raising tax rates, they appear willing to raise revenue through tax reform if that is part of a deal that also includes reductions in the long-run cost of the major entitlement programs, Medicare and Social Security.
Although some Republicans would like to see revenue increased only by stimulating faster economic growth, that cannot be achieved without the reductions in marginal tax rates and improvements in corporate taxation that the Democrats are unlikely to accept.
Raising revenue through tax reform will have to mean reducing the special deductions and exclusions that now lower tax receipts.
The potential recession risk of a budget deal can be avoided by phasing in the base-broadening that is used to raise revenue.
A desirable way to broaden the tax base would be to put an overall cap on the amount of tax reduction that each taxpayer can achieve through deductions and exclusions.
Such an overall cap would allow each taxpayer to retain all of his existing deductions and exclusions but would limit the amount by which he could reduce his tax liability in this way.
An overall cap would also cause many individuals who now itemize deductions to shift to the standard deduction – implying significant simplification in record-keeping and thus an improvement in incentives.
A cap on the tax reductions derived from tax expenditures that is equal to 2% of each individual’s adjusted gross income would raise more than $200 billion in 2013 if applied to all of the current deductions and to the exclusions for municipal-bond interest and employer-paid health insurance.
Even if the full deduction for charitable gifts is preserved and only high-value health insurance is regarded as a tax expenditure, the extra revenue in 2013 would be about $150 billion.
Over a decade, that implies nearly $2 trillion in additional revenue without any increase in tax rates from today’s levels.
Extra revenue of $150 billion in 2013 would be 1% of GDP, and could be too much for the economy to swallow, particularly if combined with reductions in government spending and a rise in the payroll tax.
But the same basic framework could be used by starting with a higher cap and gradually reducing it over several years.
A 5% cap on the tax-expenditure benefits would raise only $75 billion in 2013, about 0.5% of GDP; but the cap could be reduced from 5% to 2% over the next few years, raising substantially more revenue when the economy is stronger.
Slowing the growth of government spending for Medicare and Social Security is necessary to prevent a long-term explosion of the national debt or dramatic increases in personal tax rates.
Those changes should also be phased in gradually to protect beneficiaries and avoid an economic downturn.
America’s national debt has more than doubled in the past five years, and is set to rise to more than 100% of GDP over the next decade unless changes in spending and taxes are implemented.
A well-designed combination of caps to limit tax expenditures and a gradual slowing of growth in outlays for entitlement programs could reverse the rise in the debt and strengthen the US economy.
America’s current budget negotiations should focus on achieving a credible long-term decline in the national debt, while protecting economic expansion in the near term.
An Arab “Third Way”
AMMAN – Throughout the post-colonial period, Arab countries have consistently failed to produce an efficient – let alone democratic – system of government.
Now, after a half-century of competition between military or royal dictatorships and militant Islamist regimes, many Arabs are again seeking a “third way” – a path toward a credible form of representative democracy.
But will their efforts prove as futile now as they have in the past?
The Middle East – named for its geographic position between Europe and East Asia – was under Ottoman rule for 400 years before the Allied powers, after defeating the Ottomans in World War I, partitioned the region into distinct political units that, under the Sykes-Picot Agreement, fell within spheres of influence carved out by the United Kingdom and France.
But, in response to these new divisions, an Arab awakening – shaped by pan-Arabism and support for Palestine – was occurring.
Charismatic young military rulers-turned-dictators like Egypt’s Gamal Abdel Nasser, Iraq’s Saddam Hussein, Libya’s Muammar el-Qaddafi, Yemen’s Ali Abdullah Saleh, and Syria’s Hafez al-Assad used these popular causes to win public support.
But their failure to deliver better lives to their citizens, together with the discrediting of left-wing ideologies following the Soviet Union’s collapse, fueled the rise of a rival movement: political Islam.
The Muslim Brotherhood – established in the Egyptian town of Ismailia in 1928 and political Islam’s oldest, best organized, and most widespread proponent – was (and is) despised by both secular Arabs and Arab monarchies.
Indeed, secular dictators have worked to suppress the Brothers at every turn – often violently, as when Assad ruthlessly crushed a Brotherhood-led uprising in Hama in 1982.
Forced to operate clandestinely, the Brotherhood built its support base with a social agenda that targeted the needs of the poor, while consistently reinforcing its Islamic ties, even using the compulsory zakat (annual financial contribution to religious causes) to build up its social network.
The Brothers, with the help of a conservative society and the mosques, were prepared to seize power whenever the opportunity arose.
Another Islamist movement, Algeria’s Islamic Salvation Front, almost had such an opportunity in 1991, when it won the first round of a general election.
But the military prevented its victory by canceling the second round, triggering a brutal eight-year civil war in which an estimated 200,000 people died.
Palestine’s Hamas, an offshoot of the Brotherhood, succeeded at the ballot box in 2006, but has since failed to deliver credible governance.
Then the Arab Spring erupted in 2011, creating new opportunities for political renewal.
Within months, Islamist parties shaped by the Brotherhood’s ideology had replaced secular dictators in Tunisia and Egypt, and seemed poised to take over Yemen and Syria, largely because they were the only well-organized political movements on the scene.
Moreover, the Muslim Brotherhood gained control of Egypt, the largest and most influential of the Arab Spring countries.
But their exclusive, rigid ideology was poorly suited to governing such a large and diverse country.
As a result, after only a year in power, the military – backed by the same secular, liberal young people who had opposed it in 2011 – drove President Mohamed Morsi out of power.
Unable to mount a political alternative, however, the protesters’ rejection of the Islamist government served only to put the army back in charge.
Some argue that the absence of a secular liberal option in Arab politics stems from fear of political Islam.
For decades, Western powers backed military regimes in the Arab world, willingly ignoring their systematic repression of democratic movements and rights, in order to ensure that Islamists did not gain power.
Now that both the military- and Islamist-led systems have been discredited, an ideological vacuum has appeared in Arab politics.
But Arabs today – most of whom are under the age of 30 – are less interested in an overarching political ideology than they are in an efficient representative government that implements sound policies aimed at creating jobs and bolstering economic growth.
In short, they want a government that is focused on improving citizens’ lives.
In fact, the absence of a specific ideology was essential to the Arab Spring’s initial success in Egypt and Tunisia, for it allowed a large number of young activists to forge loose alliances.
But mass movements can take a country only so far; establishing a credible representative government requires political parties organized around clearly defined principles.
While the Muslim Brotherhood has such an organizing principle, its internal rigidity – at least with Morsi at its helm – made it unfit to govern.
Meanwhile, infighting among Egypt’s liberals prevented them from establishing a disciplined, reliable alternative to the Brotherhood based on principles like diversity, plurality, respect for women, and freedom of expression.
So when the Islamist government’s credibility collapsed, the military was Egypt’s only remaining option.
In order to make progress, the youth-led movements that drove the Arab Spring must translate their shared principles into effective political structures, and choose leaders who are capable of placing the search for consensus ahead of personal ambition.
If they succeed, the Arab world may finally have an alternative to rule by generals or mullahs.
Even if they fail to gain power, the emergence of such an alternative would surely influence the Arab world’s agenda for years to come.
An American Oil Spill
At hearings before a US Senate subcommittee, BP CEO Tony Hayward’s evasive maneuvering and failure to answer point-blank questions infuriated Congressmen and the American public alike.
His expression of “contrition” may provide some relief that the key culprit has been fingered, but it brought the sealing of the well no closer.
Furthermore, the situation in the Gulf of Mexico is worsening.  Oil is not leaking at the rate of 1,000 barrels per day, as BP originally estimated, nor up to 19,000 bpd, as calculated by the Flow Rate Technical Group.
As a newly released BP internal document revealed, the actual flow is up to 100,000 bpd.
While there is no denying that the accident will create a long list of victims – the residents of the Gulf states being among the worst affected – the American public also is to blame.
An historical addiction to cheap gasoline, and opposition to energy reform as “un-American,” has fueled an obsession with drilling, damming, and digging the country’s way out of problems.
This emphasis on the supply side (increasing access to energy fuel) has obscured cheaper and possibly more beneficial actions on the demand side (cutting energy consumption by changing people’s behavior).
For example, while Americans could have supported more aggressive fuel-economy standards or increased federal taxes on energy, they didn’t.
Under the illusion that lifestyles revolving around cheap oil and big cars were America’s perennial right, fuel-economy standards languished for decades, and politicians avoided the t-word like the plague.
All the while, Americans have been enjoying the cheapest gasoline in the developed world.
The country failed to anticipate the rise of China and India, whose exponential demand growth would have obvious implications for global energy prices.
Instead, the supply-demand gap has been partly bridged by increasingly sophisticated engineering techniques.
Technical feats like three-dimensional seismic imaging and tube-rotary drilling are no doubt impressive, but they are problematic when unaccompanied by adequate emergency-response plans or the regulatory oversight needed to ensure that accidents are prevented and mitigated.
This is plain to see today, and it resulted in Obama’s knee-jerk imposition of a moratorium on deepwater drilling permits and suspension of existing projects in the Gulf of Mexico.
While a regulatory overhaul of offshore drilling procedures and policies is clearly necessary, it will be insufficient to reduce the risk of spills and accidents if it is not accompanied by other demand-side measures.
For example, now is the time to begin reducing US oil demand through improved fuel-economy standards and/or progressive increases in fuel taxes.
Both may be necessary, because, while average fuel economy has made slight gains in recent years, the longer distances that people are traveling have offset any improvement.
The government also could start aggressively pushing a shift to electric vehicles.
In terms of total lifecycle costs, these vehicles are three to six times more energy-efficient than their petroleum counterparts.
People could make even simpler changes to their lifestyles by properly inflating their tires, driving more slowly on the highway – a car is most fuel efficient at about 55 miles (90 kilometers) per hour – and abandoning their SUVs.
The mantra of “opportunity found in crisis” has been uttered endlessly over the course of the Deepwater Horizon disaster. But seizing that opportunity requires moving past blame, learning from mistakes, and identifying how best to achieve a sensible, long-term national energy policy.
If Americans want a future without other Deepwater Horizon-style accidents and oil-tarred wildlife, they must reduce oil demand, in addition to ensuring that oil production is carried out responsibly and safely.
An Answer to the Russian Challenge
BERLIN – For 19 years, the West (America and Europe) has been putting off answering a critical strategic question: what role should post-Soviet Russia actually play globally and in the European order?
Should it be treated as a difficult partner or a strategic adversary?
Even when this choice became critically acute during the crisis of Russia’s short war against Georgia last summer, the West didn’t provide a conclusive answer to this question.
If you follow most East Europeans, the United Kingdom and the Bush administration, the answer is “strategic adversary.”
But most West Europeans prefer “difficult partner.”
These seemingly mutually exclusive alternatives have one thing in common: neither of them has been thought through to the end.
If you see Russia as a strategic adversary – and the restoration of Great Russian power politics under Vladimir Putin, to the detriment of the rule of law in domestic and foreign policy, does indeed speak for it – then the West should fundamentally change its agenda.
While Russia is no longer the superpower it was in the Soviet era, militarily it is still a great power, at least in Europe and Asia.
To address the numerous regional conflicts (Iran, Middle East, Afghanistan/Pakistan, Central Asia, North Korea) and global challenges (climate protection, disarmament, arms control, nuclear anti-proliferation, energy security) that have high priority on the Western agenda, cooperation with Russia is necessary.
A strategic confrontation with Moscow, i.e., a new kind of “mini-Cold War,” would undermine this agenda, or at least complicate its implementation significantly.
So the question is simply whether the threat emanating from Russia is so grave that this kind of strategic reorientation on the part of the West is required?
I believe it is not.
Putin’s claim to great-power status and his great-power policies are structurally very vulnerable.
Due to its geopolitical position and its potential, however, Russia will remain a permanent strategic factor in Europe and Asia that cannot be ignored.
To integrate the country into a strategic partnership is therefore in the West’s interest.
But this would require a Western policy based on long-term thinking and a self-confident and strong power position, because the Kremlin will perceive any sign of division and weakness as encouragement to return to Great Russian power politics.
A few months ago, the Russian government came up with a proposal to negotiate a new European order within the framework of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Russia considers the agreements from the 1990’s unjust, based as they were on its weakness at the time, and it wants to revise them.
Moscow’s main strategic objective is the weakening or even roll-back of NATO as an Ant-Russian military alliance and the re-establishment of its East European and Central Asian zones of influence.
But Putin is making a big mistake here, because all these aims are unacceptable for the West, and the Kremlin still doesn’t seem to understand that the best and most effective guarantee of NATO’s existence was, is, and will continue to be an aggressive Russian foreign policy.
In the former mother country of Marxism-Leninism, the leaders still don’t seem to understand dialectics.
After all, if Russia’s government really wanted to achieve a change in the post-Soviet status quo, it should, first and foremost, pursue a policy vis-à-vis its neighbors that reduces rather than increases fears.
But this applies similarly, if in reverse, to the West: on the one hand, the principles of a new Europe as defined by the OSCE after 1989/1990 don’t allow decisions about alliances to be subject to the veto of a large neighbor.
The same is true for free and secret elections and the inviolability of borders.
On the other hand, the missile defense systems in Poland and the Czech Republic, and the prospect of NATO accession for Georgia and Ukraine, assume confrontation where this was not at all necessary.
The West should not reject Russia’s wish for new negotiations on a European security system.
Instead, it should be viewed as an opportunity finally to answer the key question of Russia’s place within Europe.
NATO must play the central role here, because it is indispensable for the vast majority of Europeans and for America.
The possible trade-off could be that the existing principles and institutions of the post-Soviet European order, including NATO, remain unchanged and are accepted and implemented by Russia, which would get a significantly enhanced role within NATO, including the perspective of full membership.
The peripheral nature of the NATO-Russia Council was clearly not enough and did not work.
But why not think about transforming NATO into a real European security system, including Russia?
The rules of the game would be changed and a whole variety of strategic goals could be achieved – European security, neighborhood conflicts, energy security, arms reduction, anti-proliferation, etc.
Yes, such a bold step would transform NATO.
But it would transform Russia even more.
If the West approaches these discussions with Russia without illusions, with a clear understanding of its own strategic interests, and with new ideas for partnership and cooperation, the worst to be feared is failure.
Of course, this approach presupposes two things that don’t exist at the moment: a common transatlantic approach to dealing with Russia, and a European Union that acts in much greater unison and is therefore stronger.
Nonetheless, the challenge posed by Russia does not allow any further procrastination.
There is simply too much at stake.
Insecure Europe
MADRID – For the last five years, Europe has been shaken by financial and economic convulsions that have wreaked havoc on many of its citizens’ livelihoods.
The good news is that progress is finally being made in redeveloping the European Union’s economic and monetary architecture, which should help to bring about a return to growth.
But EU leaders’ focus on internal problems has caused them largely to neglect external policies, particularly in the area of security.
As 2014 begins, economic insecurity is giving way to worries about the EU’s strategic position.
There were expectations that the European Council’s December meeting would signal a return to a more outward-looking approach, especially on security matters.
Unfortunately, these hopes were quickly dashed.
Indeed, the disparate assortment of initiatives that were agreed at the meeting, though interesting, lack the needed breadth and scope, and will have to be integrated within a weak and outdated strategic framework.
The flawed nature of the current European Security Strategy – drafted in 2003, with a token revision in 2008 – reflects the circumstances surrounding its conception.
The ESS was developed in the aftermath of the Iraq war, amid heated debate over a proposed European constitution, in a hasty and reactive process hijacked by those who sought to position Europe as a counterweight – or even a rival power – to the United States.
Making matters worse, the geopolitical environment has changed fundamentally in the decade since the ESS was ratified, owing to economic rebalancing toward Asia, the upheavals in the Arab world, the revival of Russian assertiveness, and the rise of isolationist tendencies in the US.
As a result, the ESS does not capture the reality of today’s world – a fact that is obvious from its opening declaration that “Europe has never been so prosperous.”
To be sure, the ESS’s three basic tenets – development assistance, soft power, and effective multilateralism – remain important.
But Europe’s leaders must reconceive these concepts in light of today’s challenges.
In terms of development, Europe must move away from the idea that aid should be used to bolster trade linkages and acknowledge the importance of foreign investment.
In fact, net private capital flows to developing countries now outweigh official development assistance by nearly ten to one worldwide.
As the world’s second-largest source of foreign direct investment, the EU wields considerable influence, with European investors bringing credibility to projects and regions, thereby serving to attract further investment.
For example, Morocco’s Ouarzazate Solar Power Plant and its Drinking Water Efficiency Program were launched with €37 million ($50.6 million) from the EU’s Neighborhood Investment Facility; these projects subsequently gained additional funding totaling more than €600 million.
The ESS’s emphasis on soft power is also in urgent need of reassessment.
The upsurge of protest across the Arab world raised expectations among Europeans that these countries would, to some extent, emulate Western institutions, values, and norms.
But, while that did not occur, European principles certainly have not lost their allure, as recent protests in Ukraine, triggered by President Viktor Yanukovych’s decision to shun closer ties with Europe, have shown.
Nonetheless, the ESS’s soft-power vision should not be allowed to obscure the security challenges that Europe faces.
With the rise of non-traditional threats, Europeans are increasingly overlooking classical security risks like inter-state warfare, believing that they are no longer relevant – a notion that is reflected in the ESS.
But, as China’s increasingly assertive stance in the South and East China Seas starkly demonstrates, this idea is not only wrong; it can be very dangerous.
This brings us to the ESS’s third tenet: advancing “the development of a stronger international society, well-functioning international institutions, and a rule-based international order.”
In this case, the problem comes down to a lack of commitment, with the EU choosing the convenience of informal and ad hoc groupings over the challenge of reforming key institutions like the United Nations, the International Monetary Fund, and the World Bank, which are essential for effective multilateralism.
Indeed, the EU is among the leading actors in the current “G” fad, which has culminated most recently in the G-20.
And, despite being an embodiment of international law, the EU indulges in soft-law approaches, whether at the recent COP-19 climate-change meeting in Warsaw, or by supporting the “Geneva agreement” on Iran’s nuclear program, which, it is now clear, is nothing more than two aspirational declarations linked by a press release.
In developing its new security strategy, Europe must consider America’s role as an essential component of the geopolitical environment, viewing the US not as a foil, but as a nuanced partner.
Beyond NATO, which remains important even at a low ebb, the proposed Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership offers a potent opportunity to shape a rule-based international order.
The shine may have come off the EU, but the gripping scenes from Kyiv’s Maidan Square are a powerful reminder of the enduring appeal of Europe’s core values.
What the EU needs now is an updated external strategy that capitalizes on this allure to bolster its influence, security, and prosperity, thereby halting its slide toward irrelevance.
The Messages of May 25
KYIV – Europe recently experienced two watershed elections, with very different outcomes.
Whereas Ukraine’s presidential election has been widely hailed as the end of the beginning of Ukraine’s political transition, the European Parliament election has been lamented as the beginning of the end of the idea of an ever-closer union.
The polls, both held on May 25, not only provide insight into the mindset of the respective electorates; the behavior of each electorate also offers important lessons for the other.
Ukraine’s election was shaped by an acute awareness of the risks facing the country.
Following the “Euromaidan” revolution – which brought about the demise of President Viktor Yanukovych’s government – and a four-month interim administration, this election centered on change.
Yet Ukrainians’ chosen president, Petro Poroshenko, is the very embodiment of the establishment, having served as Economics Minister under Yanukovych and Foreign Minister under his predecessor, Viktor Yushchenko, not to mention his position within the country's traditional economic elite.
This is not as surprising as it might seem.
Ukrainians were making a sober decision, voting with their heads, not their hearts.
Indeed, polls indicate that Poroshenko’s appeal lay largely in his focus on immediate internal challenges.
By contrast, his rivals, most notably Yulia Tymoshenko, emphasized a rapid shift toward NATO and the European Union.
Ukrainians also eschewed the temptations of populism and extreme nationalism.
The poor performance of the right-wing Svoboda and Right Sector candidates – which together won less than 2% of the vote – should finally quash Russian assertions of a fascistic regime in Kyiv.
Ukrainians hope that Poroshenko, with his moderate approach and willingness to negotiate, will be better equipped to resolve the country’s perilous security situation than his more ardent rivals.
While Russian President Vladimir Putin has recently toned down his rhetoric, violence persists – a clear indication of the challenge that lies ahead.
Indeed, Ukraine remains on the verge of becoming a failed state.
Security may be the most pressing issue, but it is certainly not the only one.
Poroshenko’s government must also reinvigorate and strengthen Ukraine’s economy.
Doing so requires, first and foremost, measures to halt the decline in foreign direct investment, which fell by 30% from 2012 to 2013.
Improved governance is also critical – no small challenge for a country that ranks 144th on Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions Index, alongside Iran and Nigeria.
Ukraine’s election became a focal point for reconstruction.
The outcome was driven by voters’ recognition of their country’s fundamental problems – starkly apparent in the tents that remain on Maidan Square, the loss of Crimea, and the separatist violence in Donbas – and their desire for an effective government to address those problems.
The next step in this process – a parliamentary election – should occur as soon as possible.
The European Parliament election, by contrast, was an exercise in disruption.
Support for far-right and far-left parties was based on citizens’ frustrations with Europe’s flaws, rather than on any realistic, thoughtful agenda.
Populists and Euroskeptics fed on the discontent of those who have felt neglected by EU institutions, and now believe that the benefits of the European project, such as freedom of movement, no longer outweigh the burdens, like immigration and austerity. There is growing reticence among Europeans about further integration, owing largely to fears that ever-closer union will diminish national identity.
Of course, the notion of returning to the pre-EU world is fundamentally flawed, owing to the simple fact that individual European countries cannot compete in the modern global economy.
Nonetheless, a sense of nostalgia drove many voters’ decisions. Simply put, Europeans voted from the heart.
What Europe needs is serious debate, not emotional reactions. The problem is that the European Commission and the European Parliament have consistently failed to generate a compelling narrative, leaving ordinary Europeans unconvinced of the EU’s value.
Making matters worse, national and European leaders have allowed – even encouraged – citizens to believe that integration is inevitable, lowering the stakes for European elections.
This is where the Ukrainian election can offer a critical lesson to the EU, despite the vast differences between the challenges that they face.
The European project is a complicated and ambitious endeavor, the viability of which depends on constant care and adjustment.
Unless Europeans recognize that the Union is not a given, and acknowledge the value of the prosperity and security that it provides, the recent election may come to be seen not as a wake-up call, but as a swan song for the integration project.
The European election’s outcome also has a powerful message for Ukraine: there are limits to its European prospects.
To be sure, Ukraine has a strong partner in the EU – particularly if its government responds effectively to voters’ call for improved governance.
But, whatever Ukraine achieves, it cannot overcome Europeans’ fears of further integration, much less enlargement. That is up to Europe.
In the immediate future, Ukraine and the European Union must focus on building a functioning relationship.
For Ukraine to push for more, such as by requesting membership in the EU, would be a tactical mistake.
In this sense, the lesson of the May 25 elections is the same for both Ukraine and the EU: it is time for each to put its own house in order.
Read more from "Europe's Ever-Closer Disunion"
America’s Strategic Blindness
For more than 40 years, the Cold War policy of containment of Soviet influence provided America its strategic framework.
Though US tactics were debated and shifted from administration to administration, the overarching approach remained consistent, because it was broadly supported by Republicans and Democrats alike.
Of course, an overarching national-security strategy provided no guarantee against problems or even major disasters in countries like Vietnam and Nicaragua.
Nonetheless, in hindsight, containment infused an order and organization on US foreign policy that is absent today.
After the fall of the Berlin Wall, the necessity that had been driving containment disappeared.
The US, inebriated by victory, saw in the triumph over the Soviet bloc another sign of its exceptionalism, and found itself taken in by the mirage that its Cold War success was itself a strategy.
What followed was a decade of scattershot foreign policy marked by notable cases of inaction, together with individual initiatives taken largely without reference to a broader doctrine.
Unchallenged in the world’s unipolar moment, the US had the luxury of not knowing its strategic goals.
Shocked by the attacks of September 11, the US forced a new framework onto its still-unquestioned belief in the inexorable movement of history toward freedom.
Unfortunately, what emerged was a deeply flawed approach, not least because in declaring a “war on terror,” America positioned itself against a tactic, not an entity or an ideology.
Under Obama, the US has begun to depart from this approach.
The problem is that it remains a departure without any meaningful destination.
As in the 1990’s, the US has no organizing imperative, and the result is the same: a combination of inactivity and incoherent initiatives.
And, at a time of domestic political polarization, the lack of a global strategy denies a potential rallying point around which Democrats and Republicans can unite.
Two decades ago, geopolitical conditions limited blowback from America’s foreign-policy vacuum.
Today, the US remains the world’s essential power, but it is no longer the exclusive power.
It cannot solve problems that directly affect it by acting on its own, though its leadership remains indispensable.
That is all the more true given that the nature of such problems has also changed.
America, like the rest of us, is vulnerable to climate change, pandemics, and terrorism – challenges that require coordinated global solutions.
For the US, however, the utility of multilateralism is purely situational.
Above all, multilateralism is never preferable to a “good” bilateral solution – a view that has reinforced behavior that undermines, rather than strengthens, the capacity for effective international action.
Indeed, always ready to negotiate treaties but rarely prepared to sign – and even less likely to ratify – them, the US remains absent from such key global agreements as the Kyoto Protocol, the Mine Ban Treaty, and the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea.
Its inspired creativity and support in building formal institutions like the United Nations and World Bank has given way to a predilection for weak, informal, and ad hoc groupings, such as the various G-somethings and “coalitions of the willing.”
Establishing effective multilateralism requires an emphasis on rules and institutions that facilitate coordination.
The recent decision by the US to sign the Arms Trade Treaty could be a good start – if only Congress could marshal the bipartisan support needed to ratify it.
But scattered moves in the right direction will not suffice.
What is really needed is a change in vision and mentality – a shift from viewing multilateralism as a tactic to embracing it as a strategic imperative.
The current spying scandal is the product of a rudderless US foreign policy focused on narrowly drawn tactical objectives that exist outside the conceptual funnel of a comprehensive vision.
The result in this case has been damage to the transatlantic relationship, with some in Europe even calling for a halt to the talks on the proposed Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP).
Suspending the trade talks would be folly, not just in terms of the regional impact, but also because the TTIP should be an exercise in rule-making that echoes globally.
The current diplomatic crisis, too, is an opportunity to ensure that transatlantic discussions about privacy and surveillance reverberate in a multilateral setting; seizing it would represent a small but significant contribution to the strategic vision that has been sorely lacking for the last quarter-century.
Europe’s Juncker Revolution
MADRID – Before his appointment as EU Commission President, Jean-Claude Juncker was pilloried as an old-school federalist who would do little to alter the status quo.
But the new structure that he has imposed on the Commission implies a radical overhaul of how things are done in Brussels.
Up to now, a focus on who has been appointed to what post – in particular, the appointment of the relatively inexperienced Federica Mogherini as EU High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy – has overshadowed the Commission’s structural transformation.
But individual commissioners are far less important than the trends that have caused the Commission to shift its priorities from enlargement and the internal market toward energy and monetary union.
One such trend is Europeans’ growing skepticism toward integration, exemplified in May’s European Parliament election.
With newer European Union members backsliding – Romania on the rule of law, Bulgaria in corruption, and Hungary on democratic norms under Viktor Orbán’s government – now is the time, or so it seems, to focus on existing members.
Reinforcing this shift is Turkey’s drift toward authoritarianism, which is undermining the viability of its candidacy for EU membership.
As for Ukraine, recent gestures of solidarity, such as the signing of an association agreement, are unlikely to develop into anything substantial in the foreseeable future.
In downgrading EU enlargement as a formal policy priority, the Commission is preparing itself to take other important steps.
The upheaval among Europe’s southern and eastern neighbors may well bring about a long-overdue revamping of the EU’s Neighborhood Policy.
And, in pursuit of other avenues for expanding the EU’s reach, European leaders might reinvigorate the European Economic Area.
Another policy area that has lost its centrality is the internal market – a notable decision, given that it has been the centerpiece of the European project since the Commission was created in 1958.
The internal market’s four pillars – the free movement of goods, services, capital, and people – have underpinned broader EU measures, in areas like foreign policy and justice and home affairs, and will now be subsumed under new policy labels, from economy and financial affairs to the digital agenda.
This move away from the internal market can be explained partly by member governments’ aversion to more EU-level legislation.
Though complaints about the “bloated” acquis communitaire (the body of EU law) are often unfounded, the EU legislative process is not without its shortcomings, as recent attempts at harmonization clearly demonstrate.
For example, for the EU-wide statutory audit that was completed in April, the European Parliament agreed to a revised directive and new regulation that should have been directly applicable in all 28 member countries.
But, in more than 20 cases, member states were given discretion over its implementation and interpretation.
The new Commission will attempt to change this by focusing on rule implementation and oversight, rather than creation.
This effort will be coordinated by representatives in seven newly established vice-presidential positions, and spearheaded by the first vice president to have a portfolio focused on “better regulation.”
To be sure, easing regulatory burdens is a longstanding leitmotif of the EU.
Though the last two Commissions, led by José Manuel Barroso, espoused a commitment to rationalizing, clarifying, and compiling rules, little concrete action has been taken.
Juncker’s changes, however, may portend genuine progress on this front, as well as toward monetary and energy union.
Indeed, the new Commission’s structure suggests that Juncker hopes to enhance its role in guiding the European Monetary Union and related policies, control over which largely rested with the European Council and EU member governments (especially Germany) during the crisis.
Similarly, a new vice president has been introduced for energy, which has been reframed as “energy union.”
The lack of progress on this front during the last two Commissions was rooted mainly in Germany’s Russian modernization project, which has shaped its approach to energy security.
For its part, France has been reluctant to build an interconnected European grid, owing to its heavy reliance on nuclear energy.
Given Russian behavior in Ukraine, however, EU leaders have been rethinking their approach.
In this context, the Commission’s new structure – not to mention the fact that the new European Council president, former Polish Prime Minister Donald Tusk, has long sought an energy union – may well push the policy forward.
Though it is impossible to understand fully the implications of the Commission’s new structure at this early stage, some of its institutional ramifications are already emerging.
Beyond inciting a kind of tug-of-war with the European Council, the Commission’s shift away from lawmaking will alter the European Parliament’s role, which it has forged over the last five years on the back of the Commission’s active legislative agenda.
With little authority to initiate legislation, the Parliament, too, will have no choice but to pivot toward oversight.
Precisely how all of this all plays out in the coming months and years will determine whether the European project progresses or stagnates.
Perhaps observers should be paying a little less attention to the “who” and a bit more to the “what.”
Africa Beyond Ebola
MADRID – Among this summer’s grave global worries, the spread of the Ebola virus has monopolized the discussion of Sub-Saharan Africa and reinvigorated hoary notions of disorder and despair – at a time when a new image of a dynamic Africa was emerging.
In fact, there is still strong reason for optimism about the region’s prospects.
The Ebola outbreak overshadowed three key events affecting the region.
On July 1, a major organizational restructuring at the World Bank Group was implemented.
Two weeks later, the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa) announced the establishment of the New Development Bank.
And, in early August, African government and business leaders gathered in Washington, DC, for a summit that could portend transformative private investment in Africa.
Such investment is essential in a world in which net private capital flows to developing countries outstrip official development assistance by a margin of ten to one.
If this is to be a turning point for Africa, rather than another false dawn, this summer must be the start of a prolonged effort to stimulate private-sector engagement.
The reorganization of the World Bank is a central part of a larger effort under its president, Jim Yong Kim, to reposition the Bank as a facilitator vis-a-vis the private sector, rather than a primary provider.
From 2009 to 2013, new investment commitments by the International Finance Corporation, the World Bank’s private-sector lending arm, have risen 73%.
Meanwhile, the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency, the Bank’s provider of political risk insurance covering investments in developing countries, has moved to expand its activities, both by broadening the types of projects that it supports and widening existing definitions to allow greater coverage.
July’s restructuring occurs within the context of these broader moves.
In reorganizing the World Bank Group’s central component, the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, Kim has adopted a management-consulting model that unites expertise with regional coverage.
Seeking to eliminate the bureaucratic “silos” that have isolated regional experts from one another, 14 global practice groups in areas such as energy, water, and education have been established to bring to bear the full force of the World Bank’s considerable knowledge on projects and partnerships.
Just as the World Bank was repositioning itself, the BRICS agreed to establish their own bank.
There are significant outstanding issues about how the New Development Bank will operate, but early indications suggest that infrastructure will be central to its activities, with an emphasis on Africa.
The World Bank estimates that insufficient infrastructure reduces productivity in Africa by approximately 40%.
The entrance of a new player with initial authorized capital of $100 billion – along with the United States’ Power Africa program, which has garnered $26 billion in commitments since its launch last year, and the World Bank’s new Global Infrastructure Facility – promises to help ease infrastructure financing significantly.
But, as of now, the New Development Bank is little more than a statement of political solidarity, and whether it comes into existence remains to be seen.
Even if it does begin to function, the BRICS lack what gives development banks, and the World Bank in particular, legitimacy and weight: a staff composed mostly of dedicated experts who are among the world’s best.
Finally, the high profile of the US-Africa Leaders Summit, with more than 40 heads of state in attendance, as well as President Barack Obama’s direct involvement, generated buzz about Africa.
US businesses and investors certainly gained more awareness about Africa’s potential and a deeper understanding of the variety of investment climates throughout the continent.
But, though the summit may be called a success, its long-term implications are unclear, particularly given the uncertainty about what will follow.
At the moment, there does not seem to be a plan to institutionalize the summit.
Moreover, the participation of so many heads of state overshadowed that of African business leaders.
The practical connections that US companies will need when deciding whether to invest could have been cultivated on the summit’s margins, or in its aftermath, but were not.
Laying a foundation for future engagement requires ongoing commitment and effort that goes beyond mere publicity.
The same could be said about the World Bank.
There is much work to be done in integrating the new organizational model with existing Bank structures and practice areas.
Even if this transition occurs seamlessly, the Bank faces a serious internal struggle against entrenched bureaucratic interests and a pervasive institutional mindset that is overly risk-averse and fixates on processes rather than outcomes.
In recent years, Africa, once a land of pity, has emerged as a land of opportunity.
If it is to become a land of performance, the goal must be to facilitate investment, both domestic and foreign.
That will demand effort and commitment; given that a stable international order increasingly depends on a prosperous and growing Africa, it is a goal that the world cannot afford to miss.
Europe’s Iranian Imperative
MADRID – Last month, with the world’s attention fixed on the crisis in Crimea and the search for Malaysian Airlines Flight 370, the latest round of negotiations between Iran and the P5+1 (the United States, China, France, Russia, and the United Kingdom, plus Germany) passed quietly in Vienna.
Even with discussions set to continue next week, the talks’ outcome remains far from certain – and world leaders cannot afford to become distracted.
This is especially true for Europe, whose unified approach to Iran has been invaluable up to this point.
Indeed, it was the bite of European sanctions that ultimately brought Iran to the negotiating table, and the force of unified European diplomacy facilitated the “joint plan of action,” which set out the terms for reaching a comprehensive long-term agreement within six months.
But now, at the plan’s halfway point, there has been little concrete progress, with last month’s negotiations producing no headway on two key issues being discussed: the acceptable level for uranium enrichment in Iran and the future of the heavy-water reactor at Arak.
The sharp contrast between this lack of achievement and Iran’s recent declarations about reaching a final deal by July raises important questions about Iran’s strategy and goals – questions that negotiators must consider carefully when determining the best approach.
The key to success is the background against which the process plays out.
Iran is a land of contrasts.
On a recent visit organized by the European Council on Foreign Relations (ECFR), the coexistence of entrenched tradition and rapid transformation was starkly apparent.
Central Tehran – ebullient with young people and high-heeled women donning testimonial headscarves and mid-thigh jackets over pants – embodies a thirst for openness.
More than 60% of Iranians were born after the 1979 Islamic Revolution, and more than 40% were born after the Iran-Iraq War of the 1980’s.
For them, the revolution is a part of history, not the main source of their personal values.
The toll taken by years of tough economic sanctions is also apparent.
Despite Iranian officials’ best efforts to downplay the sanctions’ impact, it is difficult to spin inflation in excess of 30% and projected GDP growth of just 1% this year.
The combination of a young population and a crumbling economy is a combustible mix, one that amounts to an existential threat to the regime – and the regime knows it.
In this sense, the imperative to reach a prosperity-enhancing agreement with the international community is greater than ever for Iran’s leadership.
Furthermore, Iran’s negotiating style, like its capital city, can be both fatiguing and confusing.
Just moments after elaborating at length on the Koran’s prohibition of nuclear weapons, an interlocutor would declare that the underground Fordow nuclear facility’s impregnability to airstrikes must be central to any deal.
The reality is that Iran does not envisage giving up its nuclear breakout capacity.
The negotiations are aimed not at eradication, but at lengthening lead-time – specifically, limiting uranium-enrichment levels to 3.5%, establishing a strong inspections regime, and reaching an agreement on the Arak nuclear facility.
But even this may not happen.
After all, Iranian officials have thus far not demonstrated their commitment to accepting stringent and verifiable checks.
Moreover, Iran has managed to separate the nuclear negotiations from broader, related issues like its ballistic-missile program, its support for groups like Hezbollah, and its domestic human-rights record.
With the US loath to introduce potential spoilers into the mix, there is no chance that any of these issues will be up for discussion.
In this context, EU High Representative Catherine Ashton’s meeting with dissidents during her most recent trip to Tehran was merely a symbolic gesture.
This leaves Iran the opening it needs to place a strategic bet that the Syrian conflict will generate increasing friction between the West and Iran’s regional archrival, Saudi Arabia.
For Iran, a staunch supporter of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s regime, a weaker US-Saudi relationship is key to shifting the regional balance of power – especially if it is accompanied by the easing of Western economic sanctions.
To some degree, this hope is reinforced by Iran’s perception of US President Barack Obama as a motivated partner in the nuclear talks.
After all, a long-term agreement would be both a singular foreign-policy achievement for Obama and a boon to his efforts to disentangle the US from the Middle East.
But Iran also recognizes that the clock is ticking.
Obama’s presidency is coming to an end, the Republicans are poised to regain control of the Senate in November’s mid-term election, and Democrats are increasingly reticent to be viewed as “soft on Iran.”
As a result, the US Congress appears to be growing more hostile toward a deal; indeed, the longer it takes to conclude a final agreement, the more likely Congress is to scupper it.
In this context, Europe has a key role to play.
While Europe’s reputation for foreign-policy “softness” continues to shape Iranian perceptions, the EU’s role in compelling Iran to negotiate underpins the current talks.
Likewise, it was France’s insistence on more stringent controls that initially blocked the agreement in Geneva last November.
A decade ago, Europe disappointed Iran by withdrawing from negotiations, under pressure from the US – a move that some have suggested aided former Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad’s rise to power.
Today, Europe will be critical to driving progress, particularly in the event that the US Congress torpedoes a sensible agreement.
Indeed, on Iran, Europe’s unified approach has enabled it to have a greater impact than on any other significant foreign-policy issue.
This should be regarded as a model for the future and a lesson for the present.
By preserving its unity of purpose and maintaining the pressure and negotiating momentum that it has generated, Europe can demonstrate to Iran, the US, and itself that it has what it takes to be a major global actor.
Forsaken Syria
MADRID – In this year of ubiquitous commemorations, the centennial of Jan Karski’s birth has been largely overlooked.
And yet Karski’s legacy is more important than ever – nowhere more so than in Syria.
As the Geneva II peace process slogs along – leaving cadavers and atrocities to pile up – Karski’s dedication to bringing the plight of Poland’s Jews to the world’s attention during World War II, despite the inertia of governments and publics, embodies exactly what Syria desperately needs.
In 1942, Karski, a Polish-born diplomat, traveled to the United Kingdom to report on what came to be called the Holocaust.
The next year, he embarked on a mission to the United States to brief President Franklin D. Roosevelt and other dignitaries on the horrors that he had witnessed.
In both cases, he was met with skepticism and apathy.
Indeed, it was only toward the end of the war that action was taken to stop the slaughter.
Although the Holocaust is a category of persecution sui generis, one cannot avoid thinking of Karski in light of the international community’s approach to Syria today.
Expectations for the Geneva talks are so low that trivial matters – such as the fact that President Bashar al-Assad’s negotiators and the opposition are sitting together in the same room (though not at the same table) – are being hailed as successes.
Even the agreement to allow women and children to leave blockaded areas of the city of Homs – an anti-Assad stronghold – fell far short of international mediators’ vision (and even this achievement seems to be in doubt).
Instead of allowing a United Nations aid convoy to bring humanitarian aid to the area, the government agreed to release women and children on an as-yet-uncertain timeline, while men can leave only after their names had been cleared, raising fears of arrest.
Meanwhile, amid plodding deliberations of incremental steps that are clearly inadequate, Syrians are being displaced, wounded, tortured, and killed in droves.
By any measure, the level of suffering in Syria is shocking.
Although figures do not convey the cruelty by all sides, it has become de rigueur to cite the numbers: more than 100,000 dead, 2.3 million refugees, and four million people internally displaced.
But a year ago, the figures were already dire: 60,000 dead, 700,000 international refugees, and two million internally displaced.
If there were a threshold of misery that would cause the world to say, “Enough is enough,” it surely would have been crossed by now.
The ugly truth is that the world’s response to this crisis has been shaped by geopolitical interests, not the need to put an end to appalling human suffering.
Indeed, it is no secret that the conflict serves as a proxy for larger struggles – between Saudi Arabia and Iran, Saudi Arabia and Qatar, the US and Iran, Russia and the US, Shia and Sunni Muslims, and moderates and extremists – and that resolving it will require significant effort on all of these fronts.
From an American perspective, Syria is not strategically critical.
President Barack Obama’s administration has maintained an intensely inward-looking focus, reinforced by a public wary of foreign engagements.
Nothing short of a drastic change in the conflict’s nature that threatened America’s core interests would lead to direct US involvement.
Guilt, after all, is a poor motivator for international action.
Even the UK and France – the only two countries that were not shy about threatening military action against Assad’s regime – got cold feet when confronted with the possibility of going it alone.
Instead, the world is responding to graphic images of unspeakable brutality – torture by the regime or executions carried out by the opposition – with sterile shows of outrage.
The stream of statements, half-measures, and clumsy initiatives has done little to improve the situation – and, in some instances, has made things worse.
Consider Obama’s call, backed by no action, for Assad to “step aside,” and his repeated promises, dating to early 2012, to provide non-lethal aid to the Syrian opposition – promises that were finally fulfilled late last year, and then only temporarily.
This gap between rhetoric and action left a vacuum; Saudi Arabia, Qatar, and private donors subsequently filled it by channeling support to extremist elements of the opposition, strengthening their hand at the expense of those being called moderates.
But the most infamous example of this policy paralysis was Obama’s 2012 declaration that the use of chemical weapons was the “red line” beyond which the US would be forced to intervene.
His ultimate failure to follow through on his proclamation emboldened and, in a way, re-legitimized Assad.
It remains to be seen whether Geneva II will follow this pattern.
The price of the talks has already been high, with all sides having ramped up violence to strengthen their respective positions ahead of the negotiations.
This is to say nothing of the fiasco surrounding the withdrawn invitation to Iran, whose buy-in will be essential for any resolution.
In any case, the incremental nature of the talks belies the situation’s urgency.
Amid the current focus on regime change, a transitional government, and negotiating delegations, there is a real danger that the desperate humanitarian situation will be overlooked.
Here, citizens have a critical role to play.
But, like their leaders, publics everywhere have been reticent to act.
Indeed, opinion polls show that, despite near-universal awareness of the situation in Syria, there is very little public support for intervention.
But handwringing will not help; we – individuals – must accept real responsibility for ending the tragedy and press our leaders to act.
It has been more than 70 years since Karski presented his report to the world.
In that time, we have created the United Nations, adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and discussed endlessly governments’ “responsibility to protect” their citizens.
Yet, watching the Syrian tragedy develop, one might conclude that nothing has changed. How many times must we say, “Never again”?
A Nation of Vidiots
NEW YORK – The past half-century has been the age of electronic mass media.
Television has reshaped society in every corner of the world.
Now an explosion of new media devices is joining the TV set: DVDs, computers, game boxes, smart phones, and more.
A growing body of evidence suggests that this media proliferation has countless ill effects.
The United States led the world into the television age, and the implications can be seen most directly in America’s long love affair with what Harlan Ellison memorably called “the glass teat.”
In 1950, fewer than 8% of American households owned a TV; by 1960, 90% had one.
That level of penetration took decades longer to achieve elsewhere, and the poorest countries are still not there.
True to form, Americans became the greatest TV watchers, which is probably still true today, even though the data are somewhat sketchy and incomplete.
The best evidence suggests that Americans watch more than five hours per day of television on average – a staggering amount, given that several hours more are spent in front of other video-streaming devices.
Other countries log far fewer viewing hours.
In Scandinavia, for example, time spent watching TV is roughly half the US average.
The consequences for American society are profound, troubling, and a warning to the world – though it probably comes far too late to be heeded.
First, heavy TV viewing brings little pleasure.
Many surveys show that it is almost like an addiction, with a short-term benefit leading to long-term unhappiness and remorse.
Such viewers say that they would prefer to watch less than they do.
Moreover, heavy TV viewing has contributed to social fragmentation.
Time that used to be spent together in the community is now spent alone in front of the screen.
Robert Putnam, the leading scholar of America’s declining sense of community, has found that TV viewing is the central explanation of the decline of “social capital,” the trust that binds communities together.
Americans simply trust each other less than they did a generation ago.
Of course, many other factors are at work, but television-driven social atomization should not be understated.
Certainly, heavy TV viewing is bad for one’s physical and mental health.
Americans lead the world in obesity, with roughly two-thirds of the US population now overweight.
Again, many factors underlie this, including a diet of cheap, unhealthy fried foods, but the sedentary time spent in front of the TV is an important influence as well.
At the same time, what happens mentally is as important as what happens physically.
Television and related media have been the greatest purveyors and conveyors of corporate and political propaganda in society.
America’s TV ownership is almost entirely in private hands, and owners make much of their money through relentless advertising.
Effective advertising campaigns, appealing to unconscious urges – typically related to food, sex, and status – create cravings for products and purchases that have little real value for consumers or society.
The same, of course, has happened to politics.
American politicians are now brand names, packaged like breakfast cereal.
Anybody – and any idea – can be sold with a bright ribbon and a catchy jingle.
All roads to power in America lead through TV, and all access to TV depends on big money.
This simple logic has put American politics in the hands of the rich as never before.
Even war can be rolled out as a new product.
The Bush administration promoted the premises of the Iraq war – Saddam Hussein’s non-existent weapons of mass destruction –in the familiar colorful, fast-paced, and graphics-heavy style of television advertising.
Then the war itself began with the so-called “shock and awe” bombing of Baghdad – a made-for-TV live spectacle aimed at ensuring high ratings for the US-led invasion.
Many neuroscientists believe that the mental-health effects of TV viewing might run even deeper than addiction, consumerism, loss of social trust, and political propaganda.
Perhaps TV is rewiring heavy viewers’ brains and impairing their cognitive capacities.
The American Academy of Pediatrics recently warned that TV viewing by young children is dangerous for their brain development, and called on parents to keep children under two away from the TV and similar media.
A recent survey in the US by the organization Common Sense Media reveals a paradox, but one that is perfectly understandable.
Children in poor American households today not only watch more TV than children in wealthy households, but are also more likely to have a television in their room.
When a commodity’s consumption falls as income rises, economists call it an “inferior” good.
To be sure, the mass media can be useful as a provider of information, education, entertainment, and even political awareness.
But too much of it is confronting us with dangers that we need to avoid.
At the very least, we can minimize those dangers.
Successful approaches around the world include limits on TV advertising, especially to young children; non-commercial, publicly-owned TV networks like the BBC; and free (but limited) TV time for political campaigns.
Of course, the best defense is our own self-control.
We can all leave the TV off more hours per day and spend that time reading, talking with each other, and rebuilding the bases of personal health and social trust.
Anatomy of a Crisis
BERKELEY – Getting out of our current financial mess requires understanding how we got into it in the first place.
The fundamental cause, according to the likes of John McCain, was greed and corruption on Wall Street.
Though not one to deny the existence of such base motives, I would insist that the crisis has its roots in key policy decisions stretching back over decades. 
In the United States, there were two key decisions.
The first, in the 1970’s, deregulated commissions paid to stockbrokers.
The second, in the 1990’s, removed the Glass-Steagall Act’s restrictions on mixing commercial and investment banking.
In the days of fixed commissions, investment banks could make a comfortable living booking stock trades.
Deregulation meant competition and thinner margins. Elimination of Glass-Steagall then allowed commercial banks to encroach on the investment banks’ other traditional preserves.
In response, investment banks branched into new businesses like originating and distributing complex derivative securities.
They borrowed money and put it to work to sustain their profitability.
This gave rise to the first causes of the crisis: the originate-and-distribute model of securitization and the extensive use of leverage.
It is important to note that these were unintended consequences of basically sensible policy decisions.
Other things being equal, deregulation allowed small investors to trade stocks more cheaply, which made them better off. But other things were not equal.
In particular, the fact that investment banks, which were propelled into riskier activities by these policy changes, were entirely outside the regulatory net was a recipe for disaster.
Similarly, eliminating Glass-Steagall was fundamentally sensible.
Conglomerates allow financial institutions to diversify their business, and combining with commercial banks allows investment banks to fund their operations using relatively stable deposits instead of fickle money markets.
This model has proven its viability in Europe over a period of centuries, and its advantages are evident in the US even now with Bank of America’s purchase of Merrill Lynch.
But conglomeratization takes time.
In the short run, Merrill, like the other investment banks, was allowed to double up its bets.
It remained entirely outside the purview of the regulators.
As a stand-alone entity, it was then vulnerable to market swings.
A crisis sufficient to threaten the entire financial system was required to precipitate the inevitable conglomeratization.
The other element in the crisis was the set of policies that gave rise to global imbalances.
The Bush administration cut taxes. The Fed cut interest rates in response to the 2001 recession.
Financial innovation, meanwhile, worked to make credit even cheaper and more widely available.
This, of course, is just the story of subprime mortgages in another guise.
The result was increased US spending and the descent of measured household savings into negative territory.
Of equal importance were the rise of China and the decline of investment in Asia following the 1997-1998 financial crisis.
With China saving nearly 50% of its GNP, all that money had to go somewhere.
Much of it went into US treasuries and the obligations of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.
This propped up the dollar and reduced the cost of borrowing for US households, encouraging them to live beyond their means.
It also created a more buoyant market for the securities of Freddie and Fannie, feeding the originate-and-distribute machine.
Again, these were not outright policy mistakes.
Lifting a billion Chinese out of poverty is arguably the single most important event in our lifetimes.
The fact that the Fed responded quickly prevented the 2001 recession from worsening.
But there were unintended consequences.  The failure of US regulators to tighten capital and lending standards when abundant capital inflows combined with loose Fed policies ignited a furious credit boom.
The failure of China to move more quickly to encourage higher domestic spending commensurate with its higher incomes added fuel to the fire.
Now, a bloated financial sector is being forced to retrench.
Some outcomes, like the marriage of Bank of America and Merrill Lynch, are happier than others, like the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers.
But, either way, there will be downsizing.
Foreign central banks are suffering capital losses on their unthinking investments.
As they absorb their losses on US treasury and agency securities, capital flows toward the US will diminish.
The US current-account deficit and the Asian surplus will shrink.
US households will have to start saving again.
The one anomaly is that the dollar has strengthened in recent weeks.
With the US no longer viewed as a supplier of high-quality financial assets, one would expect the dollar to have weakened.
The dollar’s strength reflects the knee-jerk reaction of investors rushing into US treasuries as a safe haven.
It is worth remembering that the same thing happened in August 2007, when the sub-prime crisis erupted.
But once investors realized the extent of US financial problems, the rush into treasuries subsided, and the dollar resumed its decline.
Now, as investors recall the extent of US financial problems, we will again see the dollar resume its decline.
Emphasizing greed and corruption as causes of the crisis leads to a bleak prognosis.
We are not going to change human nature.
We cannot make investors less greedy.
But an emphasis on policy decisions suggests a more optimistic outlook.
Unintended consequences cannot always be prevented.
Policy mistakes may not always be avoidable.
But they at least can be corrected.  That, however, requires first looking more deeply into the root causes of the problem.
Anatomy of a Financial Meltdown
NEW YORK – A vicious circle is currently underway in the United States, and its reach could broaden to the global economy.
America’s financial crisis has triggered a severe credit crunch that is making the US recession worse, while the deepening recession is leading to larger losses in financial markets – thus undermining the wider economy.
There is now a serious risk of a systemic meltdown in US financial markets as huge credit and asset bubbles collapse.
The problem is no longer merely sub-prime mortgages, but rather a “sub-prime” financial system.
The housing recession – the worst in US history and worsening every day – will eventually see house prices fall by more than 20%, with millions of Americans losing their homes.
Delinquencies, defaults, and foreclosures are now spreading from sub-prime to near-prime and prime mortgages.
Thus, total losses on mortgage-related instruments – include exotic credit derivatives such as collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) – will add up to more than $400 billion.
Moreover, commercial real estate is beginning to follow the downward trend in residential real estate.
After all, who wants to build offices, stores, and shopping centers in the empty ghost towns that litter the American West?
In addition to the downturn in real estate, a broader bubble in consumer credit is now collapsing: as the US economy slips into recession, defaults on credit cards, auto loans, and student loans will increase sharply. US consumers are shopped-out, savings-less, and debt-burdened.
With private consumption representing more than 70% of aggregate US demand, cutbacks in household spending will deepen the recession.
We can also add to these financial risks the massive problems of bond insurers that guaranteed many of the risky securitization products such as CDOs.
A very likely downgrade of these insurers’ credit ratings will force banks and financial institutions that hold these risky assets to write them down, adding another $150 billion to the financial system’s mounting losses.
Then there is the exposure of banks and other financial institutions to rising losses on loans that financed reckless leveraged buy-outs (LBOs).
With a worsening recession, many LBOs that were loaded with too much debt and not enough equity will fail as firms with lower profits or higher losses become unable to service their loans.
Given all this, the recession will lead to a sharp increase in corporate defaults, which had been very low over the last two years, averaging 0.6% per year, compared to an historic average of 3.8%.
During a typical recession, the default rate among corporations may rise to 10-15%, threatening massive losses for those holding risky corporate bonds.
As a result, the market for credit default swaps (CDS) ­– where protection against corporate defaults is bought and sold – may also experience massive losses.
In that case, there will also be a serious risk that some firms that sold protection will go bankrupt, triggering further losses for buyers of protection when their counterparties cannot pay.
On top of all this, there is a shadow financial system of non-bank financial institutions that, like banks, borrow short and liquid and lend to or invest in longer-term and illiquid assets.
This shadow system includes structured investment vehicles (SIVs), conduits, money market funds, hedge funds, and investment banks.
Like banks, all these financial institutions are subject to liquidity or rollover risk – the risk of going belly up if their creditors do not rollover their short-term credit lines.
But, unlike banks, they do not have the safety net implied by central banks’ role as lender of last resort.
Now that a recession is underway, US and global stock markets are beginning to fall: in a typical US recession, the S&amp;P 500 index falls by an average of 28% as corporate revenues and profits sink.
Losses in stock markets have a double effect: they reduce households’ wealth and lead them to spend less; and they cause massive losses to investors who borrowed to invest in stock, thus triggering margin calls and asset fire sales.
There is thus a broader risk that many leveraged investors in both equity and credit markets will be forced to sell illiquid assets in illiquid markets, leading to a cascading fall in asset prices to below their fundamental values.
The ensuing losses will aggravate the financial turmoil and economic contraction.
Indeed, adding up all these losses in financial markets, the sum will hit a staggering $1 trillion.
Tighter credit rationing will then further hamper the ability of households and firms to borrow, spend, invest, and sustain economic growth.
The risk that a systemic financial crisis will drive a more pronounced US and global recession has quickly gone from being a theoretical possibility to becoming an increasingly plausible scenario.
Anatomy of a Revolution Delayed
The ongoing conflict between Iran’s rulers and the Iranian public is the result of a head-on collision between two contradictory forces. In recent years, public attitudes in Iran have become more liberal.
At the same time, power has shifted from conservative pragmatism toward a much more militant fundamentalism.  The call by the most important group of Iran’s clerics for the election results to be thrown out is but the latest sign of the fight back of both the reformist and pragmatic conservative factions.
Thirty years after the Islamic revolution, Iranians are growing demonstrably less religious and more liberal.
Two face-to-face surveys of more than 2,500 Iranian adults, conducted in 2000 and 2005, clearly show the trend.
The percentage of those who “strongly agree” that democracy is the best form of government increased from 20% to 31%.
Similarly, on a number of questions concerning gender equality – including political leadership, equal access to higher education, and wifely obedience – the numbers continued a downward trend.
Those who considered love as the basis for marriage increased from 49% to 69%, while those who depended on parental approval fell from 41% to 24%.
In 2005, a much higher percentage than in 2000 defined themselves as “Iranian, above all” rather than “Muslim, above all.”
This trend is not hard to understand.
The imposition of a monolithic religious discourse on society has made liberal values attractive to Iranians.
But, while this was reflected in reformist trends in the country’s wider political life, a movement toward militant fundamentalism took shape within the regime’s power structure.
Reform-minded politicians were partly to blame for this change.
Far from opposing absolutist power as an impediment to religious democracy, they tried to persuade the Supreme Leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, of the value of reform.
But Khamenei had no interest in reform, as he made plain in dismantling the reform movement.
The presidency of Mohammad Khatami, an avowed reformer, who served eight years, beginning in 1997, convinced the Supreme Leader that his authority would be assured only if the presidency was held by a subservient fundamentalist such as the current president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.
In this, Khamenei was following the lead of the late Shah, who kept Amir Abbas Hoveyda, a loyal retainer, as prime minister from 1965 until the Shah was overthrown in 1979.
The problem with the Supreme Leader’s calculation, however, is that Ahmadinejad is a loose cannon.
His populist rhetoric and religious fundamentalism have alienated a large section of conservative-pragmatist clerics and their supporters.
Many members of this group honor the institution of private property, and Ahmadinejad’s talk of redistributing wealth is not to their liking.
More disturbing to them is his apocalyptic conviction regarding the imminent advent of the Hidden Imam, the Mahdi, whose appearance is believed to lead to the destruction of the world and the end of time.
Generally, Ahmadinejad begins his public speeches with prayers for the Mahdi’s immediate return.
For the Shia religious hierarchy, long accustomed to relegating the advent of the Mahdi to a distant future, Ahmadinejad’s insistent millenarianism is troublesome.
They have often dismissed as unorthodox, if not heretical, any claim of personal contact with the Imam or speculation about his arrival.
Several ayatollahs opined that such talk about the Mahdi is unbecoming of a president or, worse, indicative of an unstable leader.
These concerns were reflected in the fact that the Society of Combatant Clergy, a conservative body, was unable to endorse Ahmadinejad’s candidacy.
Defiance of the Supreme Leader by millions of Iranians just a day after he firmly endorsed Ahmadinejad threw the country into a political crisis.
Worldwide broadcasts of the beating and killing of protesters have undermined the regime’s religious credentials.
Seeking a way out of this difficult situation, the Supreme Leader declared that the electoral disputes must be settled in through legal channels, not on the street.
Given his role in justifying electoral fraud, this argument seems like an effort to buy time to clear the streets of demonstrators, put opposition leaders under severe physical and psychological stress, and isolate Mir Hossein Mousavi, the presumed winner of the real vote.
Nonetheless, Khamenei’s invocation of the law echoes the demands of many conservative-pragmatists who lean toward Mousavi, who is not in a position to challenge Khamenei’s authority directly.
Mousavi must carefully continue his legal campaign, without compromising the trust he has gained from the majority of Iranians.
He must stand by his two principal demands: nullification of the election and establishment of an impartial committee to rule on the government’s violations of the electoral law.
Should Mousavi persuade Khamenei to reconsider his position, the Supreme Leader’s hold on power will be shaken.
If Khamenei holds fast, Mousavi cannot gain the presidency, but he will continue to represent the hopes of the majority of Iranians who differ dramatically with their government.
For now, what will happen depends on Mousavi’s perseverance.
Anatomy of Thatcherism
London – Thirty years ago this month, Margaret Thatcher came to power. Although precipitated by local conditions, the Thatcher (or more broadly the Thatcher-Reagan) revolution became an instantly recognizable global brand for a set of ideas that inspired policies to free markets from government interference.
Three decades later, the world is in a slump, and many people attribute the global crisis to these very ideas.  
Indeed, even beyond the political left, the Anglo-American model of capitalism is deemed to have failed.
It is held culpable for the near financial meltdown.
But 30 years of hindsight enable us to judge which elements of the Thatcher revolution should be preserved, and which should be amended in the light of today’s global economic downturn.
Most obviously in need of amendment is the view that minimally managed and regulated markets are both more stable and more dynamic than those subject to extensive government intervention.
The Thatcherite assumption, in other words, was that government failure is far more menacing to prosperity than market failure.
This was always bad history.
The record shows that the period 1950-1973, when government intervention in market economies was at its peacetime height, was uniquely successful economically, with no global recessions and faster rates of GDP growth – and growth of GDP per capita – than in any comparable period before or since.
One can argue that economic performance would have been even better with less government intervention.
But perfect markets are no more available than perfect governments.
All we have are comparisons between what happened at different times.
What these comparisons show is that markets plus government have done better than markets minus government.
Nevertheless, by the 1970’s the pre-Thatcher political economy was in crisis. The most notorious symptom of this was the emergence of “stagflation” – simultaneously rising inflation and unemployment.
Something had gone wrong with the system of economic management bequeathed by John Maynard Keynes.
In addition, government spending was on the rise, labor unions were becoming more militant, policies to control pay kept breaking down, and profit expectations were falling.
It seemed to many as though government’s reach had come to exceed its grasp, and that either its grasp had to be strengthened or its reach had to be reduced.
Thatcherism emerged as the most plausible alternative to state socialism.
Nigel Lawson was Thatcher’s second Chancellor of the Exchequer, or finance minister.
Out of the government’s anti-inflationary efforts emerged the “Lawson doctrine,” first stated in 1984 and broadly accepted by governments and central banks ever since.
“The conquest of inflation,” Lawson said, “should...be the objective of macroeconomic policy.
And the creation of conditions conducive to growth and employment should be...the objective of microeconomic policy.”
Inflation in 1950-1973 and 1980-2007 was about the same – just over 3% – while inflation targeting has failed to prevent a succession of asset bubbles that have brought recessions in their wake.
Nor has Thatcherite policy succeeded in one of its chief aims – to reduce the share of government spending in national income.
The most one can say is that it halted the rise for a time.
Now public spending is on the increase again, and record peacetime deficits of 10% or more of GDP stretch ahead for years.
In de-regulating financial markets worldwide, the Thatcher-Reagan revolution brought about the corruption of money, without improving on the previous growth of wealth – except for the very wealthy.
The average world citizen would have been 20% richer had world GDP per capita grown at the same rate between 1980 and 2007 as it did between 1950 and 1973 – and this despite China’s high growth rates in the past 20 years.
Furthermore, in unleashing the power of money, the Thatcherites, for all their moralizing, contributed to the moral decay of the West.
Against these formidable minuses are three pluses.
The first is privatization.
By returning most state-owned industries to private ownership, the Thatcher revolution killed off state socialism.
The British privatization program’s greatest influence was in the former communist states, to which it gave the ideas and techniques needed to dismantle grossly inefficient command economies.
This gain must be preserved in the face of the current clamor to “nationalize” banks.
Thatcherism’s second success was to weaken trade unions.
Set up to protect the weak against the strong, labor unions had become, by the 1970’s, enemies of economic progress, a massive force of social conservatism.
It was right to encourage a new economy to grow outside these congealed structures.
Finally, Thatcherism put paid to the policy of fixing prices and wages by central diktat or by tripartite “bargains” between governments, employers, and trade unions.
These were the methods of fascism and communism, and they would, in the end, have destroyed not just economic, but political, liberty.
Political pendulums often swing too far.
In rebuilding the shattered post-Thatcherite economy, we should be careful not to revive the failed policies of the past. I still find fruitful Keynes’s distinction between the agenda and the non-agenda of politics.
As long as central government takes responsibility for maintaining a high and stable level of employment, Keynes thought, most of the rest of economic life can be left free of official interference.
Building a proper division of responsibility between state and market from this insight is today’s main task.
An Autumn Abyss?
BERLIN – In the coming months, several serious regional economic and political crises could combine into one mega-watershed, fueling an intense global upheaval.
In the course of the summer, the prospect of a perilous fall has become only more likely.
The drums of war are being banged ever more loudly in the Middle East.
No one can predict the direction in which Egypt’s Sunni Islamist president and parliamentary majority will lead the country.
But one thing is clear: the Sunni Islamists are decisively altering the region’s politics.
This regional re-alignment need not be necessarily anti-Western, but it surely will be if Israel and/or the United States attack Iran militarily.
Meanwhile, civil war is raging in Syria, accompanied by a humanitarian catastrophe.
To be sure, President Bashar al-Assad’s regime will not survive, but it is determined to fight until the end.
Syria’s balkanization among the country’s diverse ethnic and religious groups is a clearly predictable result.
Indeed, a Bosnia-type scenario can no longer be excluded, while the prospect of the Syrian government’s loss of control over its chemical weapons poses an immediate threat of military intervention by Turkey, Israel, or the US.
Moreover, the Syrian civil war has become a proxy in an openly declared battle for regional hegemony between Iran on one side and Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Turkey, and the US on the other.
Staying on the sidelines of this Arab-Western coalition, Israel is playing its cards close to its chest.
Iran, for its part, has proclaimed Syria an indispensable ally, and is determined to prevent regime change there by all available means.
Does that mean that Hezbollah’s militias in neighboring Lebanon will now become directly involved in Syria’s civil war?
Would such intervention revive Lebanon’s own long civil war of the 1970’s and 1980’s?
Is there a threat of a new Arab-Israeli war hanging over the Middle East?
And, as Kurds inside and outside of Syria grow more assertive, Turkey, with its large and long-restive Kurdish population, is also growing restive.
At the same time, the regional struggle currently playing out in Syria is becoming increasingly entangled with the other major source of war sounds: Iran’s nuclear program.
Indeed, parallel to the Syrian drama, the rhetoric in the confrontation between Israel and Iran over the program has become dramatically harsher.
Both sides have maneuvered themselves into a dead-end.
If Iran gives in and agrees to a sustainable diplomatic solution, the regime will lose face on a critical domestic issue, jeopardizing its legitimacy and survival.
From the regime’s point of view, the legacy of the 1979 Islamic revolution is at stake.
But the international sanctions are hurting, and Iran risks losing Syria.
Everything points to the regime’s need for success – now more than ever – concerning its nuclear program.
Similarly, Israel’s government has backed itself into a domestic policy trap of its own.
Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu and Defense Minister Ehud Barak cannot accept a nuclear-armed Iran.
They do not fear a nuclear attack against Israel, but rather a nuclear arms race in the region and a dramatic shift in power to Israel’s disadvantage.
From their point of view, Israel must either convince the US to attack Iran and its nuclear plants or take on the maximum risk of using its own military forces to do so.
Both sides have substantially reduced their options, thereby limiting the possibility of a diplomatic compromise.
And that means that both sides have stopped thinking through the consequences of their actions.
Everywhere there is talk of a “military option,” which means air strikes.
But, while advocates speak of a limited “surgical operation,” what they are really talking about is the start of two wars: an aerial war, led by the US and Israel, and an asymmetric war, led by Iran and its allies.
And what if this “military option” fails?
What if Iran becomes a nuclear power, the region’s democratic movements are swept away by a wave of anti-Western Islamic solidarity, and the Iranian regime emerges even stronger?
Iran, too, evidently has not thought its position through to its logical conclusion.
What does it stand to gain from nuclear status if it comes at the cost of regional isolation and harsh United Nations sanctions for the foreseeable future?
And what if it triggers a regional nuclear arms race?
A war in the Persian Gulf – still the world’s gas station – would affect oil exports for some time, and energy prices would skyrocket, dealing a severe blow to a global economy that is teetering on the brink of recession.
China, already in economic trouble, would be hit hardest, along with the whole of East Asia.
With the US also economically weakened and facing a presidential election, America’s leadership ability would be seriously constricted.
And could a weakened Europe cope with an oil shock at all? &nbsp;A regional and global security shock caused by asymmetric warfare could add still further to the world economy’s troubles, causing exports to slump even more.
Respice finem!
(“Consider the end”), the Romans used to say.
World leaders need to take this timeless wisdom to heart.
And that applies doubly to Europeans.
It would be absurd if we had to suffer a real catastrophe again in order to understand what European integration has always been about.
Antarctica’s Point of No Return
POTSDAM – Recent satellite observations have confirmed the accuracy of two independent computer simulations that show that the West Antarctic ice sheet has now entered a state of unstoppable collapse.
The planet has entered a new era of irreversible consequences from climate change.
The only question now is whether we will do enough to prevent similar developments elsewhere.
What the latest findings demonstrate is that crucial parts of the world’s climate system, though massive in size, are so fragile that they can be irremediably disrupted by human activity.
It is inevitable that the warmer the world gets, the greater the risk that other parts of the Antarctic will reach a similar tipping point; in fact, we now know that the Wilkes Basin in East Antarctica, as big or even bigger than the ice sheet in the West, could be similarly vulnerable.
There are not many human activities whose impact can reasonably be predicted decades, centuries, or even millennia in advance.
The fallout from nuclear waste is one; humans’ contribution to global warming through greenhouse-gas emissions from burning fossil fuels, and its impact on rising sea levels, is another.
Indeed, the latest Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) report stated, in uncharacteristically strong terms, that the sea level is “virtually certain” to continue to rise in the coming centuries or millennia.
Moreover, the greater our emissions, the higher the seas will rise.
But the recent revelations about Antarctica are different.
Rather than reacting to global warming with gradual and predictable patterns of change, the West Antarctic ice sheet has suddenly “tipped” into a new state.
A relatively small amount of melting beneath the Amundsen Sea’s ice shelf has pushed its grounding line to the top of a sub-glacial hill, from which it is now “rolling down.”
Simply put, one thermal kick was enough to initiate an internal dynamic that will now continue under its own momentum, regardless of any action that humans might take to prevent it.
It is not completely clear whether humans have caused this tipping – though nothing like it has ever occurred during the 11,500-year Holocene period before humans started interfering with the planet’s energy balance.
But that is not the point.
What is important is that we recognize the existence of gigantic parts of the earth’s climate system – such as West Antarctica’s three-quadrillion-ton ice sheet – that can be tipped when a fractional temperature rise occurs in key locations.
This risk is no longer merely theoretical.
For the first time, findings based on observations and computer simulations all point to the same conclusion: the huge Amundsen Sea sector of West Antarctica has begun an irreversible ice discharge, and nothing can now halt the subsequent drainage of the entire basin.
It has passed the point of no return.
That is why we must now focus on similar topographic conditions elsewhere.
If an “ice plug” near the coast of Wilkes Basin melts or breaks off into icebergs, the basin’s huge quantities of water will drain into the ocean.
Although no one knows precisely what might destabilize the Wilkes Basin, we can be fairly certain that further global warming, caused by greenhouse-gas emissions, will increase the risk.
The fact that sea levels will continue to rise is now clear.
But we can still determine how high and how fast levels rise by controlling the degree of global warming that we cause.
Climate change is caused by mankind, so the good news is that mankind can stop it by cutting greenhouse-gas emissions.
Although West Antarctica’s fate is sealed, we may still be able to prevent the collapse of East Antarctica’s marine ice sheet.
That means deciding – sooner rather than later – which path to follow.
The current path risks further destabilization in Antarctica; choosing the alternative path of a new energy system for the planet is our last best hope.
And Free Flows the Nile
NEW DELHI – For 18 days, during the ebb and flow of protest, it did not seem possible that the end of the Egyptian Revolution would come so suddenly, in a terse announcement that lasted no more than a half-minute: “President Hosni Mubarak has relinquished office….”
With that, amidst roars of victory, an era was ended, reaffirming the old saying that “the graveyards of the world are full of those who considered themselves indispensable to their nations.”
In the days and weeks ahead, there could arise occasions when the news from Cairo is not uplifting, but let us never forget that Egypt has taken a giant step, which in reality is a giant step for all Arabs.
After all, Egypt is the heart, brain, and nerve center of the Arab world.
True, it once spawned the radical Muslim Brotherhood, but it also gave birth to Islamic socialism and anti-colonialism, Arab unity, and now a democratic affirmation of the people’s will.
Pernicious talk that Arabs do not want democracy has been exposed as the big lie it is.
Egypt, in the great Bengali poet Rabindranath Tagore’s memorable words, is the land “where the head is (now) held high and the mind is (now) without fear…” The consequences will be vast.
Ancient Arab lands are bestirred.
Decades-old, apparently immovable autocracies are finding their hold on power unhinged; change is invading their static environs.
Yesterday’s treaties, particularly those with the United States and Israel, will no longer inspire the same type of confidence they have long had as instruments of state policy.
Memory of these 18 days is so crowded that it is difficult to separate one event from another, one phase from the next: the dramatic, the moving, the bizarre, and the unreal from the bathetic.
But the thread that united all, the theme that remained unerringly constant, was the yearning for “change” – immediate, real, and tangible, not a promise or a tantalizing, unreachable mirage.
Will this yearning travel beyond the Nile, as it did from Tunis to Cairo?
This question haunts other Arab portals of power.
And not just Arab; globally, foreign policies are being hurriedly – and somewhat confusedly – revised and rewritten.
This is why US policy oscillated so disconcertingly from Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s “Do not rush the pace or else the pro-democracy movement could well be hijacked” to President Barack Obama’s emphatic call for “change now.”
Of course, a grave question arises about the now-ruling Supreme Council of the Military High Command in Egypt: How can the enforcers of the status quo become the agents of change?
But, then, military rule is only a temporary measure, or so we reason.
The great Tunisian poet Abul-Qasim Al Shabi has captured poignantly the spirit of Egypt’s saga: “If one day the people want life, then fate will arise…night fade away, chains broken…” That, in essence, is what the young in Egypt have done.
Their idiom is current; their instruments of change are today’s electronic media.
They – and we – are very far from the world that Mubarak, or the great Gamal Abdel Nasser, knew and understood.
The Egyptian revolution now faces the exacting task that confronts all successful revolutions: how to define the future.
Like the Ottoman Empire’s fragmentation in 1922 or Nasser’s overthrow of King Farouk’s regime in 1952, the current transformation, too, must be shaped.
And how that future is shaped will determine whether or not Mubarak’s end marks the beginning of political transformation throughout the Middle East.
That is the possibility that is shaking governments from Washington to Beijing.
It is not just the reliability of the Suez Canal and oil exports that are now in doubt; decades of fixed strategic certainties must now be reexamined.
Consider Israel, which has watched the events in Cairo with a degree of worry unfelt since January 1979, when Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini unseated the Shah of Iran.
That strategic nightmare cost Israel and the US their closest ally in the region, one that was soon transformed into an implacable enemy.
Israel’s two most recent wars – against Hezbollah in Lebanon in 2006, and against Hamas in Gaza in 2009 – were fought against groups sponsored, supplied, and trained by Iran.
Clearly, Israeli-Palestinian negotiations will also now lie unattended as Israel concentrates on developments in Egypt.
Above all, Israel must wonder if the peace treaty with Egypt will hold, and, if not, how to carry out the massive restructuring of its defense posture that will be required.
But it is not only the fate of Israel that has now shocked US policy, in particular, to its core.
Egypt, after all, has been the cornerstone of America’s balancing act in the Middle East – and the Islamic world – for three decades.
The Egypt-Israel peace treaty has kept Egypt comfortably neutralized, freeing the US to commit its strategic resources elsewhere.
In turn, Egypt, propped up by massive US aid, has secured the region from a larger conflagration, even though the Israel-Palestine conflict has continued to smolder.
Herein lies the core of the dilemma for the US: it wants Egypt’s basic state apparatus to survive, so that the levers of power do not fall into the wrong hands.
This requires the US to be seen as siding with the public’s demand for change, yet to avoid being identified with political immobility.
There is reason to feel reassured by Obama’s reactions.
He termed Mubarak’s departure a display of “the power of human dignity,” adding that “the people of Egypt have spoken, their voices have been heard, and Egypt will never be the same.”
But nothing that Obama, or anyone else, says can answer the question now occupying the attention of senior US officials: Will the coming of popular sovereignty to Egypt inevitably lead to anti-Americanism?
Running in Place
SANTIAGO – A billionaire with a Harvard degree runs for President of Chile promising reforms to enhance productivity and competitiveness, and wins.
Once he takes office in 2010, the economy recovers quickly from the global financial crisis, creates jobs, and continues growing until recently.
The billionaire, never one to shy from publicity, claims the credit.
Chile is a case of successful pro-market reform, argues Sebastián Piñera, who stepped down from the presidency on March 11.
He is wrong.
The Chilean economy has expanded, and no one with his or her heart in the right place can fail to celebrate that; but this growth has little to do with the former president’s policies.
Even worse, the expansion is proving to be unsustainable, and Chileans will soon feel the consequences of Piñera’s failure to carry out the pro-growth reforms he once promised.
Chile was hit hard by the 2008-2009 financial crisis: foreign loans vanished and the price of copper, Chile’s main export, collapsed.
But this time around, the Chilean economy was in shape to withstand massive external shocks.
The government had been running surpluses, public debt was almost nil, and banks were well regulated.
As a result, the government of President Michelle Bachelet (who was in office from 2006 to 2010 and has just been sworn in for a second term) was able to launch a potent anti-crisis fiscal stimulus, financed with resources saved from the earlier copper boom.
The central bank, autonomous from political pressures and run by highly respected professionals, did its part by slashing interest rates.
In Europe, the recession has lasted six years and counting; in Chile, it lasted ten months.
Tough regulation and record-low interest rates left companies and households with no debt overhang and little need to deleverage.
By late 2009, the Chilean economy was growing again, and in the years since, growth has been helped by highly propitious external conditions.
Sky-high commodity prices, rock-bottom dollar interest rates, and ample international liquidity are what Chile hopes for in the rest of the world; they are also precisely what Chile got since 2010.
Unsurprisingly, growth was swift – until late last year, when the combination of the US Federal Reserve’s gradual exit from quantitative easing and lower commodity prices worldwide caused a swift deceleration in economic activity.
After recording annual GDP growth of more than 5% on average during the last four years, Chile’s economy is expected to grow by 3.7% or less in 2014.
Piñera blamed the incoming Bachelet administration, and its plan to raise taxes, for the drop in the growth rate.
If so, Bachelet’s economists are very influential indeed, because a similar slowdown has occurred all over Latin America and in emerging countries worldwide.
The immediate cause of Chile’s slowdown is the decline in investment, particularly in mining; but the underlying problem is that the failure to diversify the economy sufficiently makes it far from clear what new kinds of investment, and which new exports, will take up the slack.
The export basket of economically diversified countries like Thailand, Malaysia, Mexico, and Ireland is entirely different from what it was a generation ago.
By contrast, Chile’s export basket has remained unchanged.
In 1984, Chile exported copper and other minerals, paper and pulp, fruits and wine, fishmeal, and a smattering of light manufactures.
Thirty years later, Chile’s exports comprise the same items.
Investment in energy would probably take off – if only Chile’s institutions were modernized to make that possible.
This is another area where Piñera’s legacy is wanting.
Chile is unique among its neighbors in having no oil or gas.
Chileans today pay the highest electricity rates in the region, because generating capacity has failed to keep pace with rising demand.
A prolonged dry spell could cause the lights to go off in the next few years.
Ensuring both cheaper energy and a clean environment is a big challenge.
Experts agree that it will require a national plan for locating generators across Chile’s mountainous territory, a revamped regime for the transmission of power, more intensive use of natural gas, and a concerted effort to promote renewables, particularly wind and solar.
Regrettably, Piñera took action in none of these areas.
Employment policy was yet another shortcoming of his administration.
With the post-2009 recovery came a drop in measured joblessness, which allowed the government to pay scant attention to a labor market that leaves out far too many women and young Chileans.
There is broad consensus that Chile must change hiring and firing rules, allow unions to negotiate shifts and working hours, improve on- and off-the-job training, and make more information available to job-seekers.
But these are all politically sensitive areas, where the smallest legal change can elicit howls of opposition.
Piñera took the safe route of attempting no changes at all.
And, of course, those young Chileans will have better prospects of getting a job if they come equipped with a first-rate education.
Chile has succeeded in getting the young into the classroom (enrollment rates are comparable to those in developed countries); but it has had limited success at ensuring that the young – and particularly the children of low-income families – receive a high-quality education once they are there.
Piñera’s government became embroiled in a fight with protesting students over who should pay for university education.
That controversy prevented most other changes in education from going forward.
Bachelet has vowed to end this paralysis and make educational reform her administration’s top priority.
The goal is laudable, but achieving it will not be easy.
Every year, Chile’s finance ministry asks a group of independent experts how fast Chile can grow without triggering inflation or other imbalances.
In 2008, before Chile felt the consequences of the financial crisis, the average answer provided by those experts was 4.83%.
In 2013, after three years of center-right government in Chile, the corresponding answer was ...4.85%.
Under Piñera’s government, pro-growth rhetoric was abundant.
But rhetoric alone cannot boost an economy’s growth trajectory.
One Hundred Days of Solitude
SANTIAGO – When violence flared up in Ukraine and protesters began dying at the hands of government agents, the European Union threatened sanctions against Ukrainian officials responsible for “violence and excessive force.”
President Viktor Yanukovych fled Kyiv, leaving behind a private zoo with exotic pigs and goats – and also the foreign ministers of Germany, France, and Poland, who were in town trying to broker a deal to end the violence.
But when violence flared up – virtually simultaneously – in Venezuela and protesters began dying at the hands of government agents, the Organization of American States raised its voice to announce that...it would not raise its voice.
The situation was up to Venezuela to sort out, the OAS stated.
Foreign ministers from other Latin American countries are nowhere to be seen in Caracas – certainly not denouncing repression and demanding an end to the violence.
Meanwhile, the body count keeps rising.
The contrast highlights what everyone already knows: Latin America’s regional institutions are weak – even weaker than Europe’s.
But it also reveals something else: a morally crooked logic that condemns governments and leaders to remain silent in the face of aggression, repression, and even death, because to say anything would be tantamount to “intervention” in another country’s internal affairs.
It was not always like this.
Not long ago in Latin America, life and liberty were deemed to be universal rights, to be defended across national borders.
My father was a Chilean lawyer and human-rights activist.
General Augusto Pinochet kicked him and our family out of the country, and I spent my adolescence and early adulthood in exile, sharing hopes and fears with other expatriates from Chile, Argentina, Brazil, and Uruguay.
None of us – and no one on the Latin American left – would have doubted for a moment that defending human rights was everyone’s responsibility, and that the international community should come down hard on governments that tortured and killed their own people.
In Pinochet’s Chile or General Jorge Rafael Videla’s Argentina, anyone who complained about government-sponsored violence was painted as a member of an international communist conspiracy.
Today, anyone who complains about violence in Venezuela is, according to President Nicolás Maduro, a fascist and a lackey of the American empire.
Everything has changed, yet everything remains the same.
Yes, the situation in Venezuela must be sorted out by Venezuelans.
The problem is that some Venezuelans today cannot march peacefully on the streets without being shot at.
Some Venezuelans cannot speak freely to their fellow citizens, because each and every television station that would carry their words has been muzzled or driven off the air.
And some Venezuelans cannot be sure their rights will be respected.
Terms in office have expired for the prosecutor-general, members of the national election commission, and supreme court justices, but no successors have been named, because Maduro is unwilling to negotiate with the opposition and lacks the two-thirds majority in the National Assembly needed to appoint officials of his choosing.
Venezuelans would like nothing better than to be the ones who decide their own destiny, but the democratic means to do so are being denied to them.
Indeed, one of the key opposition leaders, Leopoldo López, has been arrested on ludicrous charges of “inciting crime.”
It would have been preposterous to tell Ukrainian demonstrators facing government storm troopers to just grin and bear it without any external solidarity or support.
It is just as preposterous to tell Venezuelan demonstrators the same thing.
In these circumstances, the principle of self-determination, so beloved of foreign ministries everywhere, becomes an empty slogan.
Perhaps the saddest of all foreign reactions came from the University of Chile’s student federation.
Using language reminiscent of the Stalinist 1950’s, the federation – which has led student protests demanding better education in Chile – condemned their Venezuelan counterparts for “defending the old order” and “deviating from the path the people have chosen.”
The problem with this argument (if one can call it that) is that “the people” do not speak with one voice, nor do their pronouncements fall fully formed from the sky.
To figure out what real people actually want and respond accordingly, democracies have procedures, constitutional guarantees, and individual rights.
When these are trampled upon, as they have been in Venezuela, people can neither speak freely nor choose their path.
It is equally silly to argue that Maduro’s actions must be legitimate because he came to power through an election.
A democratically elected leader retains legitimacy only to the extent that he or she behaves democratically once in office.
As Georgetown professor Hector Schamis recently recalled, António de Oliveira Salazar in Portugal, Alfredo Stroessner in Paraguay, and Suharto in Indonesia attained power through elections, yet no history book calls them democratic.
Yanukovych, too, won an election, but he will be remembered mostly for the bloodshed he unleashed, the bankruptcy that now faces Ukraine’s economy, and, of course, his private zoo and stable of Ferraris.
Venezuelans, like Ukrainians, should know that they are not alone.
Their struggle for democratic rights is everyone’s struggle.
People in Latin America know this, even if their leaders are not always willing to say it out loud.
Industrial Policy Reconsidered
SANTIAGO – First, the World Bank became a tireless advocate of women’s and gay rights.
Then the International Monetary Fund backed the use of capital controls and voiced concern over income inequality.
Next in line for ideological modernization is the Inter-American Development Bank (IADB): in a forthcoming report, the bank calls for industrial policies in Latin America.
This is a welcome development.
To be sure, the IADB – never as stodgy as the Bretton Woods twins, but still a traditional international financial bureaucracy – does not speak of industrial policies; it uses the politically correct phrase “productive development policies” (PDPs).
Yet the message is clear: in Latin America, the state and public policy should have a role in deciding what gets produced.
A generation ago, this message would have been heretical.
Today, it is a matter of common sense.
Last week, economists from the IADB brought their gospel to a conference in Santiago, Chile.
The country, for decades the region’s poster-child for good economic management, is also an example of the risks that all Latin American economies face.
With commodity prices falling and dollar interest rates on the rise, Chilean growth is slowing sharply.
Productivity gains have been sluggish for nearly 15 years, and the country’s export basket is the same as it was in the 1980’s.
Chile’s growth problems are among the least severe in the region.
It is one of only four countries (along with Brazil, Panama, and the Dominican Republic) that have managed to reduce the per capita income gap with the United States since 1960.
As the IADB has pointed out in several earlier reports, productivity has been stagnant in most of Latin America for a half-century or more.
What is to be done?
The conventional prescription includes improving education (especially the technical kind), modernizing labor markets, reducing bureaucratic red tape, and facilitating foreign investment and technology transfer.
To this standard tool kit the IADB now adds PDPs, which can be “horizontal” or “vertical.”
Horizontal PDPs provide the inputs that a broad range of firms, across different sectors, need for their growth and development.
Simple examples include transport infrastructure, trained engineers, and a labor force proficient in English.
More sophisticated examples can involve systems for health and safety inspection, product-quality certification, or intellectual-property protection.
The problem is that some of these publicly provided inputs can be sector- or product-specific.
Roads to remote and beautiful mountains foster eco-tourism but do not help carry merchandise to the nearest port.
A lab built to certify that beef does not have foot-and-mouth disease is of little use in verifying that fruit and vegetable exports are similarly disease-free.
That is where vertical policies – those that favor a particular sector – come in.
Horizontal PDPs are relatively uncontroversial, but vertical PDPs can unleash severe criticism, with skeptics claiming that they involve “picking winners.”
But, as the examples given above suggest, the line between horizontal and vertical policies is inevitably fuzzy.
In other words, when a government provides money to train a particular kind of engineer, lay out a particular road, or build a particular lab, it is favoring one sector over others, and hence de facto picking winners.
The IADB argues that it is better to do this consciously, transparently, and with the appropriate checks and balances.
Vertical policies are also useful in solving coordination failures.
Consider the tourism industry, which has great potential in the beautiful Patagonia region of southern Argentina and Chile.
But no private firm will build a hotel in this remote, under-populated region if no road leads there.
By the same token, no government official will build a road if there are no hotels or lodges, for the road would lead nowhere.
Without deliberate private-public coordination focused on tourism, the sector may never take off.
Skeptics also point out that Latin America already went through a round of industrial policy in the 1960’s and 1970’s, with results that were mediocre at best.
The IADB report provides a balanced assessment of that episode.
Though import substitution and subsidies were initially successful in igniting industrialization, lack of scale soon hindered efforts (a country of a few million cannot hope to have an auto industry aimed only at the domestic market).
Worse, government help was handed out to strong and weak performers alike.
In Asia, many firms that initially received help sooner or later became world-class competitors.
In Latin America, with little market and policy discipline and chronically overvalued exchange rates, that transition seldom happened.
To be sure, those problems had to be corrected.
But in doing so, claims the IADB, Latin American governments may have gone too far: “There is now a growing consensus among policymakers and analysts alike that by putting all industrial policy out of bounds, the region may have thrown out the baby with the bathwater.
More and more, the question is not put in terms of whether to do active productive development policies but rather how to do them.”
Unlike 1960’s-vintage industrial policy, modern PDPs aim to correct market failures, not do away with market incentives.
Market failure is not the only issue.
The emerging new approach to PDPs is also fearful of state failure.
State agencies can be captured and aid can be used for private or political gain.
To prevent this, the report again usefully deviates from reigning orthodoxy, which tells countries to identify and copy “best practices” from abroad.
This approach cannot succeed if such practices require what local government cannot deliver.
Hence, “the focus ought to be not on policy best practices but on policy best matches with institutional capabilities.”
Latin America will need a great deal of fresh thinking and many policy innovations if it is to keep growing in a post-commodity-boom era.
No policy is failure-proof.
But the approach advocated in the forthcoming IADB report is the region’s best hope today.
Dead Cow Walking?
SANTIAGO – Simón Bolívar, the South American independence hero who hoped to weave the continent into a single nation, would shudder at the disintegration that prevails today in the continent’s energy sector.
Surely he would understand that no community can be built on so fragmented a foundation.
Peru has gas, which it sells to Mexico.
Bolivia also has gas, but it has been under-exploiting it ever since it nationalized the industry in 2006.
Argentina used to have a gas industry, but it was decimated by years of misguided government policies.
Brazil discovered hydrocarbons deep in the Atlantic Ocean a few years ago and has begun auctioning off rights, but actual production is still years away.
Chile has no oil or gas, and no one in the neighborhood will sell it any, so it has to buy its supplies from as far away as Indonesia.
Moreover, South America’s electricity grids are seldom interconnected, and rates for power vary widely.
Brazil and Chile have the region’s highest electricity prices (which are also among the highest in the world).
