The huge Vaca Muerta (Dead Cow) field, owned by the energy company YPF, is just now beginning to be explored.
Argentina’s government expropriated YPF from Spain’s Repsol in 2012, with the resulting suits and countersuits delaying any potential investment in shale.
But, with Argentina and Repsol recently reaching a settlement, interest has revived.
Surely, the technical challenges of exploiting such shale-gas reserves are huge, and only a handful of firms in the world have the necessary knowhow.
The financial challenges are even greater: analysts speak of tens or even hundreds of billions of dollars in required investment.
But the potential for Argentina and the region is tremendous.
Federico Sturzenegger, an Argentine economist and President of Banco de la Ciudad de Buenos Aires, has estimated the value of Vaca Muerta gas (at the prices Argentina currently pays for gas imports) to be equal to nine times the country’s GDP.
But, because world prices are likely to drop fast as the US steps up exports, Argentina has to act quickly in order to capture these potential gains.
Sturzenegger has called the decision about shale gas “the most important” in Argentina’s economic history.
Argentina’s choices could matter not just for the region’s economy, but also for its politics.
Because Vaca Muerta holds much more gas than Argentina could ever burn, exports are the inescapable way forward, and neighboring Brazil and Chile are among the natural customers.
The shift in the regional balance of gas-based power could in turn cause nationalists in Bolivia, Peru, and elsewhere to rethink their policies.
Integration in the oil, gas, and other energy industries, along with the interconnection of national power grids, could follow.
South America’s economic and political landscape would be changed forever.
Is this too optimistic?
Perhaps.
The political and legal safeguards needed to make energy flows safe and reliable would have to be built.
As the region’s history shows, that is no easy task.
Time and again, nationalism and shortsighted politics have trumped reason.
But the stakes are so high, and the potential so great, that the least one must do is hope.
Mercosur Blues
SANTIAGO – When the leaders of Mercosur met in Caracas this week, the usual bluster about standing up to imperialism filled the air.
But so did the unmistakable scent of decay.
Mercosur is usually described as a trade grouping; in fact, it has been a political creation from the start.
Brazil, the regional powerhouse, always viewed it as a counterweight to the United States in hemispheric affairs.
Peronist governments in Argentina used it to hype integration while doing little or nothing to remove actual barriers to trade.
With the entrance of Hugo Chávez’s Venezuela in 2006, the lurch toward populism became unmistakable.
As a Chilean government minister late last decade, I remember the frustration of attending Mercosur gatherings (Chile is an associate member).
They were long on posturing and endless speeches, but short on substantive agreements about anything.
At the 2006 summit in Córdoba, when Chávez and Fidel Castro dueled over who could deliver the longest and most rambling address, spirits were running high.
Bolivia, also governed by a charismatic populist, was keen to develop closer ties.
Ecuador soon followed suit.
And a smattering of smaller countries in Central America and the Caribbean fell into political line in exchange for generous infusions of Venezuelan cash and oil.
Back then, Mercosur leaders could claim to offer an “alternative development model” for the region.
No more.
This week in Caracas, the mood was funereal.
The host, Chávez’s successor Nicolás Maduro, confronts a collapsing economy and tensions within his own party.
Despite relatively high oil prices, Venezuela has a large fiscal deficit and falling foreign-exchange reserves.
The inflation rate is the region’s highest, and the economy is stagnating.
In the face of popular frustration with worsening living conditions, Maduro’s government has relied on violent repression to put an end to street protests.
Opposition leader Leopoldo López spent months in a military prison before recently being put on trial.
Institutions like Human Rights Watch have repeatedly denounced the government’s rights violations and restrictions on civil liberties.
Argentina’s president, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, arrived in Caracas hoping to rouse support in her fight against the so-called vulture funds that bought her country’s sovereign bonds on the cheap and have successfully sued for payment in full.
But Fernández found that her colleagues’ polite words of encouragement mattered little.
The US Supreme Court’s decision last month to uphold a lower court’s ruling against Argentina put her in an impossible situation.
Paying the recalcitrant bondholders would mean losing face and possibly triggering a salvo of copycat lawsuits; not paying would mean technical default and all of its attendant costs.
She chose the latter option.
Access to foreign capital matters for Fernández, because, like Maduro, she faces a stalled economy and a growing dollar shortage.
Domestic stabilization measures earlier this year bought her some time, yet fear of a recession remains.
In an effort to regain access to capital markets, her economic team patched up things with the Paris Club of sovereign creditors and Spain’s Repsol (the former owner of nationalized oil giant YPF); but the fight with the vultures has set the country back.
With a presidential election looming in October 2015, most potential candidates (even those from her own party) are quickly distancing themselves from her authoritarian style and troubled economic legacy.
In Bolivia, President Evo Morales has resorted to legal and constitutional shenanigans to guarantee himself yet another term in office.
After two terms, Morales would in theory be prohibited from running again.
But Bolivia’s constitutional court has ruled that he can, because the adoption of a new constitution redefined the country as the Plurinational State of Bolivia; Morales, therefore, served his first term as the head of a different state.
When asked why he will run again, he replied – in a peculiar confession for a nationalist leader – that former Queen Sofía of Spain had encouraged him to “finish the job.”
In Ecuador, too, democratic institutions are under siege.
An independent report has chronicled 12 separate episodes of government meddling with court rulings.
A controversial gag law on the press that was enacted last year has already ended a major newspaper’s print edition.
According to Catalina Botero, the outgoing rapporteur for Freedom of Expression of the Inter-American Human Rights Commission, “Ecuador is, along with Cuba, the country that most restricts freedom of expression.”
Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff faces a situation that is both similar to and different from that of her Mercosur colleagues.
Brazil is not the kind of country where a president can manipulate the constitution or close newspapers at will.
But malaise is in the air in Brasilia (leaving aside the World Cup thrashing delivered by Germany).
Brazil’s swift recovery from the 2008 financial crisis endeared it to international financial markets; but weak growth since then has left yesterday’s promise unfulfilled.
Despite low unemployment, economic anxiety is on the rise – and is beginning to filter to the political realm.
With Rousseff dropping in the polls and her opponents slowly gaining, the October presidential election – once thought to be a done deal – may be up for grabs.
Absent from the Caracas summit was Chile’s president, Michelle Bachelet, who blamed a cold and a busy domestic agenda for her inability to travel.
Political complications linked to a possible meeting with the Venezuelan opposition, which Bachelet had chosen not to attend (preferring to send her foreign minister), likely also played a part.
Rousseff and Bachelet were natural candidates to lead the development of a moderate counterweight to the populism of Maduro, Fernández, Morales, and Correa.
But Rousseff, like her predecessor, the popular Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, has chosen not to fill that role, instead cozying up to Venezuela.
Chile is too small to go it alone, and Bachelet has her hands full with increasingly controversial tax, education, and constitutional reforms.
Uruguay’s president, José Mujica, offered the best summary of what happened in Caracas: “We issued a statement.”
In other words, Mercosur remains an irrelevant talking shop – and the emergence of a modern center-left regional leadership in Latin America will have to wait.
The Third Way\u0027s Second Chance
SANTIAGO – Remember Tony Blair and Bill Clinton’s Third Way?
It is back.
The faces and names have changed, but the idea that governments can – and should – combine social-democratic values and modern liberal economics has returned to center stage.
At a June 2000 gathering of leaders in Berlin, hosted by Germany’s then-Chancellor Gerhard Schröder, the Third Way seemed like the way of the future.
The gathering was Blair’s brainchild (though he did not attend because his wife had just had a child).
But Clinton held forth eloquently on how new technologies could help to solve age-old social ills.
Leaders from Sweden and New Zealand argued that you could make the state both leaner and more effective.
And the Third Way could travel well to what was once called the Third World, claimed South Africa’s Thabo Mbeki, Brazil’s Fernando Henrique Cardoso, and Chile’s Ricardo Lagos (I was present as part of Lagos’s delegation.)
Sadly, it was not to last.
The sound bites about progressive governance did not grow easily into a lasting political philosophy.
Al Gore traded Clintonomics for traditional populism and was defeated by George W. Bush.
Social democrats and their allies lost power in several European countries.
The war in Iraq and the global financial crisis of 2008-2009 caused a backlash against some of the policies advocated by Third Way leaders.
Fast forward to the present.
Italy’s 39-year-old socialist prime minister, Matteo Renzi, is often described as his country’s last hope.
He is promising (though not quite yet delivering) deep labor-market and fiscal reforms.
After his electoral victory, Renzi received early kudos from Blair himself, who claimed that “Matteo has the dynamism, creativity, and toughness to succeed.”
Manuel Valls, France’s Socialist prime minister, is staking his political capital on an ambitious program of tax and spending cuts that does not enjoy the backing of his party’s traditionalist wing.
Critics from the orthodox left accuse him of “taking solutions from Blair and Schröder.”
Renzi and Valls – along with Pedro Sánchez of Spain’s Socialist Party – are part of a broader trend.
With the world economy growing slowly, many center-left politicians are trying to mobilize markets and jump-start growth while investing in jobs and skills.
Thus, dire need is the immediate explanation for the return of Third Way ideas.
It is not surprising that deeply indebted European governments are casting about for new social policies at a low fiscal cost.
But the harsh austerity advocated by Germany’s conservative government is not the same as the gradual adjustment sought by the new generation of Southern social democrats.
Conservatives demand fiscal adjustment up front, whatever the consequences.
Modern social democrats who have read their Keynes understand that some immediate adjustment is necessary to make the program credible.
But they also know that additional spending on human capital and physical infrastructure is necessary to limit the impact of fiscal retrenchment on employment and wages and to strengthen the economy’s growth potential.
The other reason for giving Third Way ideas a second hearing is that they work.
Schröder’s reshaping of Germany’s labor market in the early 2000s was hugely controversial at the time; but, in retrospect, it turned Germany from the sick man of Europe into the continent’s export powerhouse.
The Nordic countries have led the way in experimenting with new ways to deliver public services while adopting “flexicurity” in labor relations.
The result: they have achieved the trifecta of robust growth, high employment, and low public debt.
The effectiveness of these ideas is not limited to the rich countries of the North.
The governments of the Concertación in Chile, Alan García in Peru, and Fernando Henrique Cardoso in Brazil all derived inspiration from the Blair-Clinton-Schröder agenda.
All had (or have) their share of controversies.
But each undeniably launched an unprecedented period of democratic consolidation and economic modernization in their respective countries.
In Brazil’s upcoming presidential election, both of the incumbent Dilma Rousseff’s main opponents are advocating policies that hark back to the good old days.
In the case of Aécio Neves, who belongs to Cardoso’s party, that is not surprising.
But it is remarkable in the case of socialist Marina Silva, who is calling for new trade pacts beyond Mercosur and for making the Central Bank of Brazil independent.
Blair, who gave the Bank of England its full independence during his first week in office, would be proud.
There are many differences across countries and time, but in the end four ideas are common to these successful experiences.
The first is policy pragmatism.
What matters is what works, not what is ideologically pure.
Instead of the sterile and endless debate as to whether the state should be big or small, it is more fruitful to ask what kind of state intervention, and where.
The second idea is fiscal realism.
Budgetary prudence is both desirable (unsustainable deficits owe their name to the fact that they cannot be sustained) and progressive (when things blow up, it is the poor and the vulnerable who suffer the most).
The third idea is modern welfarism.
The state can and should redistribute income and wealth, but in doing so it should not weaken incentives to work and to save.
Instead of simply providing handouts, governments should strive to guarantee good jobs at good wages.
Finally, the Third Way is defined by progressive liberalism.
Liberty and equality are complementary, not contradictory, principles.
If the rules are designed properly, a society in which people decide and act freely can also be a society in which opportunities are fairly distributed.
And conversely, without minimum opportunity for all, liberty is more illusory than real.
These four ideas animate a Third Way that is now enjoying a second chance – though it should have been the first choice all along.
The Lawless Sea
SANTIAGO – The rule of law is almost entirely absent, with virtually no governance or policing.
Illegal, unreported, and unregulated economic activities are common.
The powerful seize non-renewable resources at the expense of the powerless.
Environmental degradation is on the rise.
That may sound like a description of a failed state, a desperately poor country beset by civil war, or a fictional dystopia.
But it is none of the above.
The vast region (45% of the earth’s total surface) with next to no governance or rule of law is the high seas – nearly two-thirds of the global ocean that lies outside of any country’s jurisdiction.
How is this possible?
After all, there is the legally binding 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, which has been ratified by 166 states and the European Union.
When UNCLOS was negotiated, the high seas were protected because they were inaccessible.
But technological advances have enabled the exploitation of resources to extend farther and deeper than ever before.
Fishing vessels can now operate across the ocean, and deep-sea drilling provides a growing proportion of our oil and gas.
UNCLOS has not kept pace with these developments.
Industries and activities such as fisheries, shipping, and seabed mining are all regulated separately.
No governance framework is in place for emerging high-seas industries such as energy production.
Transparency and accountability are weak, and there is little enforcement of rules.
Moreover, the authorities have limited power to intercept vessels suspected of illegal activity.
As a result, international cooperation to counter illegal fishing, smuggling of weapons and drugs, human trafficking, piracy, and the use of vessels in terrorist operations has been greatly hampered.
The consequences are dire.
The ocean is our planet’s life-support-system, keeping it healthy and productive.
But overfishing and pollution are causing tremendous damage.
Marine debris causes the death by drowning, suffocation, or starvation of some one million seabirds and around 100,000 marine mammals (seals, whales, and dolphins) every year, not to mention the hazard posed to shipping by sea junk.
Plastic pollution – including pellets and micro plastics that enter food chains and can endanger human health – is a growing problem.
Likewise, rising temperatures are reducing the ocean's oxygen-carrying capacity.
The increasing uptake of carbon dioxide is causing ocean acidification and unprecedented changes in chemical and physical conditions, which in turn are affecting marine organisms and ecosystems.
The very life of the global ocean is under threat.
The time has come to bring the rule of law to the high seas.
That is the purpose behind the Global Ocean Commission, an independent international body comprising former heads of state, ministers, and business leaders.
I am one of the commissioners.
Last week, we proposed a rescue package that offers eight proposals to improve governance and restore ocean health.
To strengthen high-seas governance, the Global Ocean Commission is joining the call for a new agreement under UNCLOS to protect biodiversity beyond national jurisdiction.
Less than 1% of the high seas is currently protected, so it is crucial that this new agreement includes provisions for creating protected areas in the high seas.
We are also proposing that an international convention be adopted to establish liability and compensation for both economic losses and ecological damage caused by offshore oil and gas exploration and production, which should also always be subject to legally binding safety protocols.
Despite overfishing, a handful of countries – including the United States, Japan, and China, as well as the EU – are artificially supporting industrial high-seas fishing.
Without subsidies, high-seas fisheries would not be financially viable.
We are proposing that subsidies be capped immediately and eliminated within five years, and that countries be fully transparent about all fishing subsidies, about 60% of which directly encourage unsustainable practices.
Moreover, to eliminate illegal fishing, which strips our oceans of marine life, we are calling for mandatory identification numbers and the tracking of all high-seas fishing vessels, and a total ban on transshipment at sea.
By closing loopholes, we will finally close our ports and markets to illegally obtained fish.
An independent Global Ocean Accountability Board – the creation of which we are also proposing – should monitor progress on all of these fronts.
In five years, if ocean decline continues and adequate prevention measures have not been implemented, the international community should consider turning the high seas – with the exception of those areas where action by regional fisheries management organizations is effective – into a regeneration zone where industrial fishing is forbidden.
We can reverse ocean degradation, and turn the cycle of decline into a cycle of renewal.
We know what needs to be done to restore ocean health, but we cannot do it alone.
Delivering change will take political will and require joint efforts by governments, businesses, and civil society.
It can and must be done.
Join our mission at http://missionocean.me.
The time to act is now.
Unless we respond with strong governance and the necessary tools to enforce regulations, ruthless pirate fishing will continue with impunity, there will be no binding international safety standards for deep sea oil and gas drilling, and plastic pollution and abandoned fishing gear will continue to proliferate.
The more the global ocean struggles for life, the more our children and future generations will struggle for theirs.
Argentina’s Use and Abuse of Keynes
BUENOS AIRES – “We are all Keynesians now,” Republican US President Richard Nixon famously said in 1971.
Today, Axel Kicillof, Argentina’s Peronist economy minister, is echoing this sentiment.
Is he right?
Kicillof has gained international recognition as the public face of Argentina’s fight against the so-called vulture funds that want to extort full payment on Argentine bonds that they purchased for a few pennies on the dollar.
But, before joining President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner’s cabinet, Kicillof was known in Argentine intellectual circles as the author of the book Volver a Keynes (Return to Keynes).
Last week, addressing a gilded ballroom packed with the elite of Argentina’s business community, Kicillof explained the government’s policies as a real-world application of Keynesian theories.
In an hour-long speech, he made two key points.
First, Kicillof attributed Argentina’s rapid economic growth in the years between its 2001 debt default and the 2008 global financial crisis to a Keynesian reflation of domestic aggregate demand.
Keynes made a tremendous intellectual contribution in showing that supply in a market economy does not necessarily create its own demand, and that demand shortfalls can cause avoidable recessions.
Is this logic at work in Argentina?
When the Argentine economy imploded in 2001, citizens lost their jobs and firms lost their access to credit, causing domestic demand to collapse.
Output fell sharply.
But, as the country abandoned the one-to-one currency peg to the US dollar, the real exchange rate depreciated.
This shifted demand away from imports toward domestically produced goods.
Next, a sharp rise in the price of food exports, heavily taxed in Argentina, augmented government revenues, providing the cash to finance increased expenditure.
Given Argentina’s isolation from world financial markets, its central bank could cut domestic interest rates with limited fear of capital flight.
The fiscal and monetary impulse supported a rapid recovery.
At first glance, Kicillof seems to be correct; this looks like textbook Keynesian reflation.
But Keynes would not have approved of the macroeconomic policies pursued by Fernández and her predecessor and husband, the late Néstor Kirchner.
A Keynesian approach would ensure that demand does not fall short of supply.
The Kirchners have made sure that demand far exceeds supply.
The fact that Argentina’s annual inflation rate has stood at 20% or more for over a decade clearly illustrates this – and cannot be obscured by frozen utility rates and repeated manipulation of the consumer price index.
Kicillof’s second point was that Argentina’s businesses and consumers should not succumb to pessimism.
Alluding to Keynes’s theories about self-fulfilling expectations, he warned that, if people expect things to go wrong, they will.
Keynes did say – and it was a very important insight – that a capitalist economy resembles a beauty contest, with judges voting not for the most beautiful contestant, but for the contestant whom they believe their colleagues will find most beautiful.
Shifts in expectations can thus alter the outcome.
But Argentines are not pessimistic about the economy because other Argentines are pessimistic.
They are pessimistic because the economy’s fundamentals are weak – a fundamental difference.
In 1991, the Nobel laureate economist Paul Krugman, who is perhaps the world’s leading Keynesian today, showed that whether or not expectations are self-fulfilling depends on underlying economic conditions.
If an economy’s fundamentals are very weak, a crisis will inevitably occur sooner or later; if its fundamentals are very strong, a crisis never happens; and if they are in an intermediate range, a crisis happens if – and only if – people expect one.
A couple of years ago, the eurozone was in the latter situation.
That is why European Central Bank President Mario Draghi’s pledge to do “whatever it takes” to save the euro immediately brought the eurozone’s debt crisis to a halt.
(The growth crisis, of course, has yet to be resolved.)
But Argentina is not the eurozone.
There is nothing that Kicillof could say today that would have the soothing effect that Draghi’s promise did.
Argentines today feel much like Dorothy did when she first landed in Oz – they are not in the safe and familiar “Kansas” anymore.
But Keynes is not to blame. Kicillof and Kirchner are.
The High Cost of Ocean Decline
SANTIAGO – The world’s oceans are in trouble.
In late September, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change reported that the oceans are warming, seawater is acidifying, and oxygen concentrations are dropping.
Last week, another initiative, the International Program on the State of the Ocean, outlined the toll that these and other factors, such as destructive fishing and pollution, are having on marine life.
Ocean degradation is not as visible as deforestation, but it is at least as dangerous.
The oceans provide at least half of the oxygen we breathe.
They absorb more carbon dioxide than forests do.
Harm to the oceans can have a tremendous global impact.
Degradation is particularly serious in the one substantial part of the world that is governed internationally – the high seas.
These waters are outside maritime states’ exclusive economic zones; they comprise two-thirds of the oceans’ area, covering fully 45% of the earth’s surface.
The Global Ocean Commission, an independent initiative that I joined earlier this year, is reviewing the condition of the high seas.
Next year, it will produce a set of recommendations concerning how to restore our oceans to full health and ecological productivity.
One of the first tasks is to quantify the economic losses caused by ocean degradation.
Back in 1997, a pioneering paper by Robert Costanza and his colleagues put the overall value of marine ecosystem services at $21 trillion.
Others have estimated that illegal fishing costs the global economy $10-23.5 billion per year, and poor management of fisheries $50 billion per year.
But these figures are nearly a decade old; the Commission will update these estimates and make them more precise.
It is not enough to document that the losses are big.
Obviously, the next question is what to do about it.
No single official body has overall responsibility for the high seas.
So, even if the economic losses turn out to be much higher than previous estimates, there are currently few effective mechanisms to bring about change.
The basic pillar of ocean governance, the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, was established 30 years ago.
Since then, huge technological advances have occurred, and demand for resources has increased massively.
So stopping and reversing the degradation of the world’s oceans requires improved governance mechanisms, which must be used to enforce economically sensible and innovative solutions.
Here the experience of countries fighting against deforestation is helpful.
Costa Rica arguably started a trend in the early 1990’s, when it began levying taxes on fossil fuels and using the revenue to protect forests.
The net result was a reversal of deforestation.
The economy has benefited directly through a growth in tourism, and indirectly by preserving ecosystem services such as pollination.
The concept of payment for ecosystem services is currently receiving attention from governments around the world.
Costa Rica and Colombia have both signed up to a program funded by donor governments.
Brazil has schemes that pay for protecting watercourses.
An initiative called REDD (Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation) would pay for ecosystem services on a global scale by rewarding forest conservation, thereby regulating climate change.
These ideas should receive more attention in the future, as our supplies of non-renewable resources dwindle.
When the Global Ocean Commission issues its recommendations for reform next year, economics will be at their heart.
Once we have more accurate data on the value of the ocean, we must decide how we use this information.
Payment for ecosystem services could be a solution, though there are likely to be simpler options.
But whichever mechanism is eventually adopted, we must also address the governance question: today’s inadequate system allows both economic and ecological losses to persist.
The Commission will share its recommendations with governments.
There are tremendous costs associated with allowing the current laissez-faire regime to continue.
We hope leaders understand that the world’s oceans – and the ecosystem services they provide – are too important to be allowed to fail.
Secular Stagnation Heads South
SANTIAGO – As commodity prices come back to earth and the Federal Reserve’s gradual exit from quantitative easing leads to higher interest rates in the United States, Latin America’s economies face the challenge of sustaining growth.
The region’s main economies recorded slower GDP growth in 2013, and much the same is being forecast for 2014.
It is pretty clear by now that an extraordinarily benevolent external environment, not a revolutionary policy shift, underpinned Latin America’s rapid growth in the years following the 2008-2009 global economic crisis.
As long as the price of soy, wheat, copper, oil, and other raw materials remained stratospheric, commodity-rich countries like Brazil, Chile, and Peru got a tremendous boost; even Argentina grew rapidly, despite terrible economic policies.
But now “secular stagnation” – the concept du jour in US policy debates since former Treasury Secretary Larry Summers argued last November that the US (and perhaps other advanced economies) has entered a long period of anemic GDP growth – may also be coming to Latin America.
The argument goes like this: high consumer debt, slowing population growth, and rising income inequality have weakened consumer demand and stimulated savings, while slowing growth in productivity and output itself has discouraged investment.
So the “natural” rate of interest – the rate at which the demand for investment equals the supply of savings – has fallen, and arguably has become negative.
But, because real interest rates cannot be strongly negative unless inflation is high (which it is not), there is a savings glut.
With consumption and investment lagging, the US economy is bound to stagnate.
But how could such a situation apply to Latin America, where GDP growth is faster, interest rates are higher, and domestic demand is stronger than in the US?
Consider the region’s history.
Until the recent commodity-driven boomlet, growth in Latin America was mediocre.
The 1980’s are known as the “lost decade,” owing to a debt crisis and massive recessions, while the market-based reforms of the 1990’s did little to reignite short-run growth.
From 1960 to 2007, only four countries in Latin America and the Caribbean – Brazil, Chile, the Dominican Republic, and Panama – grew faster than the US.
So meager growth in the coming years would be a return to Latin America’s historical pattern, not a deviation from it.
That brings us back to secular stagnation.
Yes, Latin American countries’ average per capita GDP is only one-quarter that of the US, so they should be growing faster than their rich northern neighbor.
The question is how much faster.
Stagnation in this context means a growth rate that is too low to ensure convergence toward US living standards within a reasonable period of time.
Unlike the US, Latin American economies’ actual output is at or near potential, so growing more means investing more.
Yet investment has been disappointing.
And the region’s problem is not too much domestic savings, but too little.
Latin American countries save 18% of GDP, on average, compared to 30% in fast-growing East Asia.
As a result, every time investment picks up in Latin America, it has to be financed with loans from abroad.
Foreign investors are willing to live with the resulting current-account deficits, but only up to a point.
It took only a few words from Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke last May – announcing the eventual end of quantitative easing – for markets to lose confidence in emerging economies with current-account deficits near or above 4% of GDP.
Brazil was the most prominent among the Latin American economies under attack, but analysts worried about similar vulnerabilities elsewhere in the region.
As a result, now, as in the recent past, whenever foreigners get jittery, financing and investment in Latin America are curtailed, and growth suffers.
The scarcity of savings in the region reflects the weak incentives embedded in poorly designed tax and pension systems.
But savings performance is also related to long-standing fiscal problems.
To be sure, the fiscal stance improved in many Latin American economies in the years leading up to 2007, so countries like Chile were able to mount a strong anti-crisis fiscal response.
But, as a 2013 Inter-American Development Bank (IADB) report makes clear, the fiscal stimulus was not always withdrawn in time when the crisis abated, so the fiscal position across the region today is weaker than it was in 2007.
The composition of government spending is also a problem.
According to the same IADB report, investment accounts for only 16% of fiscal outlays, less than half the share in emerging Asia.
So Latin America suffers from a longstanding infrastructure deficit, which acts as a drag on growth.
Even abundant domestic savings in the future would not guarantee higher investment.
Firms’ eagerness to invest depends on how much additional output they can get out of that investment, and recent productivity growth in Latin America – as in the US – has been disappointing.
Lagging productivity has many causes, but one is the failure to diversify local economic structures.
Economies become more productive either by doing what they do more efficiently, or by shifting resources into new sectors in which productivity is higher – a process that can be observed (or not) by looking at export diversification.
And the sad fact is that today most Latin American countries – Mexico being a notable exception – export pretty much the same goods that they exported a generation ago.
That is yet another big difference between the region and East Asia.
So, can Latin American economies keep growing once commodity prices and world interest rates edge back toward normality?
We in the region hope they can.
But a return to stagnation is also a possibility – one that can be minimized only if policymakers acknowledge it and begin taking preventive action right away.
The Humanities Crisis
NEW YORK – A striking symmetry is emerging in debates about the future of higher education around the world.
On the one hand, there is growing concern that the United States and many European countries are failing to prepare enough university graduates in the fields driving the twenty-first century “knowledge economy,” such as engineering and information technology.
This fear has led to the narrowing of the concept of education to mean the acquisition of practical skills.
On the other hand, the worry in some parts of Asia is that young people entering the work force with strong technical training lack sufficient experience “thinking outside the box.”
This fear is manifesting itself in an incipient effort to expand education to include the cultivation of feeling and imagination.
Both movements are rooted in economic concerns.
In the US, where most undergraduates bear at least part of the cost of their university education, political pressure is mounting to provide incentives like tuition discounts or loan forgiveness to students of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (the so-called STEM fields).
Cost-cutting measures, such as compressing traditional four-year degree programs into three years – thereby reducing or eliminating elective courses in “impractical” subjects like literature, philosophy, and fine arts – are also being discussed.
Meanwhile, in Hong Kong, Singapore, and China, there are calls for extending university programs so that students can obtain a broad, liberal education, in the hope that graduates will be more inclined to experiment and innovate.
Hong Kong University, for example, has extended its undergraduate programs from three years to four.
But such a narrow, economics-based view fails to account for the larger questions of value that societies worldwide are facing.
To be sure, progress in any field, from commerce and communications to health and environmental science, will become increasingly dependent on technological innovation, and thus on the high-order skills – acquired through intensive technical training – that drive it.
It is also true, however, that such training does not provide an adequate foundation for addressing the more abstract, but profoundly important, questions that ultimately must guide global policy and decision-making.
For example:
·         How can the imperative of economic development be reconciled with the need to limit climate change?
·         What does national sovereignty mean in a world where diseases, pollutants, and terrorists cross national borders at will?
·         Are there universal human rights that transcend conflicting claims of particular cultural traditions?
·         How should limited resources be distributed in order to provide opportunity and hope to young people, while treating the elderly with dignity and respect?
·         What are a country’s obligations to refugees fleeing from persecution, poverty, or strife elsewhere?
·         How should we balance individual liberty and collective security?
In answering such questions, advances in science and technology (for example, new methods of energy production, surveillance, or online learning) will have a key role to play.
But moral and ethical questions never yield fully to technical solutions; they also require an understanding of humanity’s social and cultural heritage.
Science can help us to attain the life we want, but it cannot teach us what kind of life is worth wanting.
In short, each side in the current education debate is half right.
As human affairs become increasingly complex and morally exigent, future generations will need both scientific and humanistic learning – and they will need them more than ever.
Fortunately, promising new models for making education more coherent and capacious are emerging.
Yale University and the National University of Singapore have worked together to establish Yale-NUS, Singapore’s first liberal arts college.
Led by a literary scholar and an astronomer, this new residential college aims to break down interdisciplinary boundaries and enable students to learn from one another.
Likewise, Quest University in Canada encourages students to bring both scientific and humanistic knowledge to bear on today’s most pressing problems.
Similar efforts have been underway for years in the US.
For example, North Carolina State University’s Benjamin Franklin Scholars program – a collaboration between the College of Engineering and the College of Humanities and Social Sciences – aims “to produce well-rounded professionals who are analytical problem-solvers, ethical decision-makers, and effective communicators.”
Unfortunately, such programs largely lack the visibility and influence needed to shape educational reform.
It is time to abandon the “either/or” discourse that pits science against humanities – which the British chemist and novelist C.P. Snow identified more than a half-century ago as an obstacle to human progress.
It is time to seek out best practices that bridge this putative divide, and scale them up.
In the important work of adapting educational institutions for the future, we must not lose sight of their core mission as articulated in the past.
No one has expressed that mission better than Benjamin Franklin, a man of letters and a scientific innovator, who defined education as the quest for “true merit.”
“True merit,” Franklin wrote, consists in “an inclination joined with an ability to serve mankind, one’s country, friends, and family; which ability is…to be acquired or greatly increased by true learning; and should, indeed, be the great aim and end of all learning.”
This is an aspiration that should be renewed for every generation.
China’s Subprime Risks
HONG KONG – It is now widely accepted that the recent global financial crisis was actually a balance-sheet crisis.
Long periods of negative interest rates facilitated the unsustainable financing of asset purchases, with high-risk mortgages weakening national balance sheets.
When liquidity in the key interbank markets dried up, the fragilities were exposed – with devastating consequences.
Today, the rapid expansion of Chinese financial institutions’ balance sheets – which grew by 92% from 2007 to 2011, alongside 78% nominal GDP growth – is fueling predictions that the country will soon experience its own subprime meltdown.
Is there any merit to such forecasts?
The first step in assessing China’s financial vulnerability is to distinguish a solvency crisis, which can occur when firms lack sufficient capital to withstand an asset-price meltdown, from a liquidity crisis.
During the Asian financial crisis of the 1990s, some countries suffered foreign-exchange crises, in which devaluation and high real interest rates de-capitalized banks and enterprises, owing to the lack of sufficient reserves to repay foreign-exchange debts.
In the case of Japan’s asset-price collapse in 1989, and again in the United States in 2008, bank recapitalization and central-bank liquidity support restored market confidence.
The recently released Chinese Academy of Social Sciences (CASS) National Balance Sheet Report suggests that China is unlikely to undergo a foreign-exchange or national insolvency crisis.
At the end of 2011, the central government’s net assets amounted to CN¥87 trillion ($14 trillion), or 192% of GDP, of which CN¥33 trillion comprised equity in state-owned enterprises (SOEs).
Moreover, at the end of last year, China’s net foreign-exchange position totaled $2 trillion – 21% of GDP – with gross foreign-exchange reserves totaling just under $4 trillion.
The concern is China’s rapidly increasing domestic debt, which currently stands at 215% of GDP.
Since 2008, SOEs and so-called local-government financing platforms have been using loans to fund massive fixed-asset investments, while private-sector actors have been borrowing – often from the shadow-banking sector – to finance investment in real-estate development.
This excessive dependence on credit stems from the lack of adequate funding and the relative underdevelopment of China’s equity markets, with market capitalization amounting to only 37% of GDP, compared to 104% of GDP in the US.
The debt held by non-financial enterprises amounts to 113% of GDP in China, compared to 72% in the US and 99% in Japan.
But, given that the largest enterprises are either state-owned or local-government entities, their debts are essentially domestic sovereign obligations.
With China’s total government debt/GDP ratio amounting to only 53% – much less than America’s 80% and Japan’s 226% – there is sufficient space to undertake debt-equity swaps to tackle the internal-debt problem.
Of course, China’s leaders will also need to pursue major fiscal reforms, including improved revenue-sharing between central and local governments.
In the longer term, the authorities must put in place stricter regulations to ensure that local-government infrastructure investments are sustainable and do not depend excessively on revenue from land sales.
In the interim, the burden of adjustment will fall largely on monetary policy, which will be particularly challenging given the structural “tightness” in liquidity in the more productive sectors.
From 2007 to 2011, China’s money supply increased by 116%, whereas its foreign-exchange reserves grew by 180%.
The excess was mopped up through statutory reserve requirements amounting to as much as 20% of bank deposits.
With the official banking system thus constrained, it allocated the remaining credit to large enterprises and those with sufficient collateral, resulting in an uneven distribution of loans across regions and sectors.
As a result, large enterprises – mostly SOEs, which enjoy considerable financial subsidies and liquidity – accounted for 43% of total bank loans in 2011; small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs), which face financial repression, including higher borrowing costs and tight liquidity, accounted for only 27%.
This highlights two fundamental structural imperatives.
First, large SOEs and local governments must be discouraged from over-investing, which undermines the rate of return.
Second, more capital must be channeled toward SMEs and faster-growing regions, which are more likely to generate jobs and innovation.
In other words, interest-rate reforms must be pursued alongside capital-market reforms that boost access to credit by the more productive sectors.
China cannot complete its transformation from an export-led economy to one driven by domestic consumption and services unless value creation through innovation exceeds value destruction from excess capacity.
In short, despite a strong national balance sheet and ample central-bank liquidity, China is confronting a localized subprime problem, owing partly to high reserve requirements.
One promising move is the central bank’s recent release of CN¥1 trillion in liquidity through direct lending to the China Development Bank for the reconstruction of shanty towns, fulfilling the need for socially inclusive investment.
Unlike the US Federal Reserve, it has not purchased subprime mortgages.
The key to success will be to manage the sequence of liquidity injections and interest-rate reforms so that the effort to address local subprime debts does not trigger asset-price deflation, while reducing financial repression that cuts off funding to more productive sectors and regions.
If it manages to get these structural reforms right, China – and the rest of the world – will be able to avoid the consequences of a hard economic landing.
Harnessing China’s Competitive Streak
HONG KONG – China’s State Council recently unveiled a comprehensive blueprint for capital-market reform until 2020, in which it identifies two key objectives: “to support open, fair, and integral market processes, and to protect investors, particularly the legal rights of small investors.”
Achieving these goals, as the blueprint recognizes, will require policymakers to weigh market autonomy against state authority, innovation against stability, investor protection against caveat emptor, and the temptation of rapid reform against the need for pragmatism.
Can it be done?
From a policy perspective, the goal should be to strike a balance between competition (which spurs growth-enhancing innovation but can also generate instability) and cooperation (which promotes long-term social cohesion but can also lead to stagnation).
In doing so, China’s leaders must account for three levels of competition: inter-enterprise competition, inter-sectoral competition, and competition among the interests of citizens, businesses, and the state.
The implementation of a competition framework for enterprises is a work in progress.
In 2008, the government enacted an anti-monopoly law aimed at preventing anti-competitive or “monopoly” agreements among enterprises, minimizing abuse of market dominance, and blocking mergers and acquisitions that would eliminate or unduly restrict competition.
But managing competition in a market that has three major players – state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and domestic and foreign private companies – is a complex task.
Private-sector firms are frustrated with the privileges that SOEs enjoy, while foreign-owned enterprises complain that they are at a disadvantage vis-à-vis domestic companies.
The management of inter-sectoral competition is even more complicated.
In banking, for example, competition is extremely fierce, and China is one of the few economies where concentration (the market share of the top five players) has declined in recent years.
But, more than a decade after China’s accession to the World Trade Organization, foreign banks’ share of the Chinese market stands at a miniscule 2% – a reflection of Chinese regulators’ failure to create a level playing field.
The challenge is intensified by technological advances and regulatory arbitrage.
E-commerce platforms like Alibaba have not only breached banks’ payment business; they have also begun to offer wealth-management products.
And regulatory arbitrage has fueled the emergence of shadow banking, which is competing actively with traditional financial institutions for wealth-management and lending business.
Regulatory arbitrage arises from competition among central-government agencies for the authority to regulate – competition that often delays market reforms and institutional change, owing to agencies’ unwillingness to accept one another’s authority.
For example, overlapping regulation by at least five agencies and ministries has delayed the development of China’s bond market considerably.
The best example of healthy competition in China is that which occurs among cities.
China has 287 prefecture-level cities, with a median population of 3.7 million and median per capita GDP of $5,800.
Sixteen cities have already crossed the World Bank’s threshold for high-income status, with annual per capita incomes of more than $12,616, and four – Beijing, Shanghai, Guangzhou, and Shenzhen – have global reach.
These cities hold the key to the ability of China as a whole to avoid the middle-income trap.
That should come as no surprise. The secret of China’s economic success since 1979 has been the easing of central-planning rules to empower cities, markets, and private businesses to experiment, innovate, and grow.
Given the difficulty of identifying which of the old rules needed to be reformed or eliminated, the process depended on the delegation of central-government powers to local governments, which were better equipped to experiment with market rules to boost economic growth.
At the same time, in order to preserve the system’s stability and integrity, these efforts were accompanied by the centralization of fiscal authority and certain oversight powers.
This balance between horizontal competition and vertical regulation was critical to promoting growth and dynamism in Chinese cities.
But the balance has been far from ideal.
Indeed, competition among cities – intensified by the large role that municipal-level GDP growth plays in determining local officials’ career paths – went too far, creating destabilizing imbalances.
Yes, local autonomy facilitated bold productivity-enhancing activities, such as the use of rural land for industry and commerce and the creation of public-private partnerships to finance major infrastructure projects; private enterprises were thus able to seize market share from SOEs in the service and manufacturing sectors.
But cities’ hasty efforts to imitate one another’s growth models also led to overwhelming environmental pollution, mounting debt, excess infrastructure capacity, rising inequality, depletion of farmland, and rampant corruption, including administrative abuses that encroached on citizens’ property rights.
Competition-fueled growth propelled China’s emergence as the world’s second-largest economy.
But it is unsustainable.
The imperative now is to rebalance competition to address the negative externalities of state and market activities that harm citizens’ interests.
The central government’s recent removal of certain judicial powers from local governments, thereby strengthening protection of property rights, is an important step in this direction.
But it is not enough.
Enabling the market to drive resource allocation, while ensuring a level playing field for all participants, will require the establishment of clear competition principles, possibly supported by a powerful “competition commission.”
No competition can work without clear, fair rules.
That is the real challenge facing China’s leaders today.
If they succeed, a high-income China will be only a matter of time.
Re-Governing China
BEIJING – This year’s China Development Forum in Beijing revealed the clearest vision yet of how China’s leaders intend to deliver the “Chinese Dream,” which President Xi Jinping has described as “national rejuvenation, improvement of people’s livelihoods, prosperity, construction of a better society, and military strengthening.”
The question is whether the government can follow through on its ambitious reform and development plans.
Last November’s Third Plenum of the 18th Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party produced more than 330 major reforms in 60 areas for implementation by 2020 – a package of unprecedented scale, depth, and complexity.
Orchestrating China’s transformation from a manufacturing- and export-based economic model to one driven by consumption and services – and that is inclusive, environmentally sustainable, and creates more than 13 million jobs annually – is a massive undertaking.
Add to it the challenge of upholding financial and social stability – and accomplishing all of this while managing one of the world’s largest bureaucracies – and the task ahead becomes truly mind-boggling.
Consider the effort last summer to assess the government’s financial condition.
The National Audit Office had to mobilize 55,400 staff members to review not only the central government’s accounts, but also those of 31 provinces and autonomous regions, five central municipalities, 391 cities, 2,778 counties, and 33,091 rural communities.
The investigation covered 62,215 government departments and agencies, 7,170 local-government financing vehicles, 68,621 public finance-supported reporting units, 2,235 public business units, and 14,219 other entities – responsible, altogether, for 730,065 projects and 2,454,635 items of debt.
Clearly, public-sector governance in China is radically different from that in the West, where the rule of law, democratic elections, and free markets are structural norms.
And, though 35 years of major reforms have brought about considerable change, with the private sector now accounting for the bulk of job creation, there remains much to be done – exemplified in the fact that the state, especially local governments and state-owned enterprises, still command most of China’s credit resources.
One way to appreciate the complexity of China’s governance ecosystem is to examine the matrix of relationships among institutions, the tiao tiao kuai kuai – literally, “lines and pieces.”
Tiao tiao refers to the vertical lines of control from the central government through national ministries or agencies to local-level institutions. They include central planning concerning development and reform; the nomination and promotion of officials to important posts in ministries, state-owned enterprises, and local governments at all levels; and macroeconomic tools, particularly fiscal, monetary, exchange-rate, and regulatory policies.
Kuai kuai refers to the lateral, highly competitive relationships among regional entities, to which the central government delegates a certain amount of autonomy.
In order to achieve genuine stability, China’s leaders must strike a delicate balance between tiao tiao control and kuai kuai autonomy.
But this has proved difficult, with relaxation of tiao tiao often leading not just to rapid regional growth and improvements in local public services, but also to widening imbalances and a heightened risk of overheating, owing to pro-cyclical herding behavior, such as excessive fixed-asset investment.
The government is then forced to re-impose central control abruptly, bringing about a sudden stop.
If China’s economy were a car, the country’s leaders would always be either flooring the accelerator or slamming on the brakes.
With its latest set of reforms, China’s government is attempting finally to fine-tune its approach.
The package centralizes some responsibilities, such as managing resistance from vested interests, while expanding local-government autonomy in other areas, including procedures for licensing and planning approval.
With the creation of free-trade zones – which entail lower tariffs, reduced customs barriers, and less administrative intervention – the government is attempting to give market forces a decisive role in resource allocation.
This effort to ease unnecessary constraints on regional entities will lead to market and institutional innovations.
These innovations, together with increased transparency and the implementation of cutting-edge technologies, are likely to reduce rent-seeking and corruption, while boosting productivity and employment significantly.
The government’s recent decision to phase out the household registration (hukou) system will augment these gains further, as it gives workers and private business-owners alike the opportunity to choose where to live, work, and invest.
As China’s leaders explicitly recognized at the Third Plenum, the removal of arbitrary tiao tiao controls can enable cities and local communities to evolve according to their own comparative advantages.
But China’s gradual opening up will increasingly allow companies and individuals to cross national borders in search of more lucrative opportunities, complicating the country’s governance matrix further.
Indeed, coping with global competition for markets, resources, talent, and respect will require a two-way interaction between Chinese and global governance systems.
China’s leaders have already demonstrated that they understand the need to implement modern management techniques, and that doing so requires them to update and recalibrate the tools of central control on which they have long relied.
With the right adjustments, China’s governance system can effectively address market failures like air and water pollution, food safety, energy efficiency, and social inequality, while ensuring the country’s long-term prosperity.
This process is only beginning, but it is off to a strong start.
Great Cities and Ghost Towns
HONG KONG – Many observers tend to regard the rise of unoccupied modern “ghost towns,” funded through risk-laden local-government financing vehicles (LGFVs), as symptoms of China’s coming collapse.
But this view underestimates the inevitability – indeed, the necessity – of such challenges on the path to development.
In 2012, the venture capitalist William Janeway argued that economic development is a three-player game involving the state, private entrepreneurial innovation, and financial capitalism, with inevitable cyclical overshoots that create the conditions for the next wave of invention and output growth.
The United States had ghost towns and local bank busts once it began investing in railways, mining, and industrialization in the mid-nineteenth century.
But it experienced no systemic crisis that spilled over its borders.
Without large-scale infrastructure investment, especially in transport, the productivity gains that enabled America’s emergence as an industrial power would have been impossible.
Though the process included significant creative destruction, rapid economic growth offset losses resulting from excess capacity.
Similarly, when viewed through the long lens of history, China’s ghost towns will prove to be potholes on the path to development.
China’s massive infrastructure investment, funded largely through LGFVs, will most likely be remembered for its critical contribution to the country’s economic modernization.
Of course, the translation of infrastructure investment into economic progress is not guaranteed.
The new infrastructure – together with on-the-job training that enables Chinese workers to manage it effectively – must boost the country’s productive capacity sufficiently to offset the value destruction from obsolete fixed assets and underemployment.
In this sense, China’s prospects are promising.
As it stands, the total value of infrastructure investment in China amounts to only about 240% of GDP, less than half of Japan’s 551% – and with a much younger population.
China’s capital stock remains below $10,000 per capita; that figure is above $90,000 in the US and more than $200,000 in Japan (at 2011 prices).
Moreover, roughly 1% of China’s population – about 12 million people – is migrating to cities each year.
Unrelenting demand for modern, innovative infrastructure that supports citizens’ livelihoods, improves energy efficiency, and minimizes pollution cannot simply be ignored – especially given urbanization’s central role in driving economic modernization and productivity gains.
Though LGFVs carry some intrinsic risks, stemming from relatively low levels of transparency and government supervision, they have been integral to China’s industrialization process so far.
Indeed, they emerged in the early 1990s to enable Shanghai and Guangdong to upgrade their infrastructure in preparation for their industrialization drive.
Both cities suffered from weak technical and institutional capacity and little foreign exchange or domestic credit.
By working with the World Bank and the China Development Bank (CDB), Shanghai and Guangdong created an innovative institutional structure to facilitate the coordination of stakeholders to deliver specific infrastructure projects, employing the legal and accounting tools of modern corporations.
In other words, the LGFV is, at its core, a vehicle for local modernization.
This institutional innovation enabled the reconstruction of hundreds of Chinese cities, connected by airports, highways, high-speed rail, and advanced telecommunication systems.
Supported by these structures and linkages, one-third of Chinese cities have attained per capita GDP of more than $10,000.
Moreover, the original LGFVs were not subject to maturity mismatches, because they were funded through long-term CDB loans, with local governments using the fees and taxes they accrued from the completed infrastructure to cover operating costs and service their debt.
In this way, LGFVs also helped to create the network linking local markets to global value chains.
But, as is often the case, success led to excess.
Massive government stimulus in the wake of the global financial crisis spurred local governments to take loans from Chinese banks to realize dream infrastructure projects, with remote cities attempting to imitate urban showcases like Shanghai or Shenzhen.
In a sense, this was a positive development.
After all, leveling the infrastructure gap enlarges the range of options from which people and companies can choose when deciding where to live or establish factories and offices.
But the infrastructure boom was underpinned by the belief that local governments would always have access to easy credit, cheap land, and rising demand.
When the market tightened in 2011, many projects’ prospects diminished, spurring LGFVs to seek credit in the shadow banking sector, which has caused their borrowing costs to rise and introduced new market-based challenges to the reform process.
Nonetheless, because China is a net lender to the world, LGFV debt has no global systemic implications.
While China’s outstanding local-government debt totaled CN¥29 trillion ($4.7 trillion) at the end of 2011, its land and fixed assets are worth some CN¥90 trillion, meaning that even if asset values were written down by half, local governments would remain solvent.
This leaves only the issue of debt servicing.
To resolve it, the government has announced fiscal reforms to split revenues between central and local governments and enable local governments to issue long-term municipal bonds.
China’s ghost towns and local-government debts are not harbingers of doom. They are bumps on the road to a developed economy, in which excesses will have to be resolved by the state or the market.
In fact, overcoming these challenges will make for a more resilient economy in the long run.
The Coming CLASS War
HONG KONG – The eighteenth-century German military strategist Carl von Clausewitz defined war as the continuation of politics by different means, and, like the ancient Chinese strategist Sun Tzu, believed that securing peace meant preparing for violent conflict.
As the world becomes increasingly tumultuous – apparent in the revival of military struggle in Ukraine, continued chaos in the Middle East, and rising tensions in East Asia – such thinking could not be more relevant.
Wars are traditionally fought over territory.
But the definition of territory has evolved to incorporate five domains: land, air, sea, space, and, most recently, cyberspace.
These dimensions of “CLASS war” define the threats facing the world today.
The specific triggers, objectives, and battle lines of such conflicts are likely to be determined, to varying degrees, by five factors: creed, clan, culture, climate, and currency.
Indeed, these factors are already fueling conflicts around the world.
Religion, or creed, is among history’s most common motives for war, and the twenty-first century is no exception.
Consider the proliferation of jihadist groups, such as the Islamic State, which continues to seize territory in Iraq and Syria, and Boko Haram, which has been engaged in a brutal campaign of abductions, bombings, and murder in Nigeria.
There have also been violent clashes between Buddhists and Muslims in Myanmar and southern Thailand, and between Islamists and Catholics in the Philippines.
The second factor – clan – is manifested in rising ethnic tensions in Europe, Turkey, India, and elsewhere, driven by forces like migration and competition for jobs.
In Africa, artificial borders that were drawn by colonial powers are becoming untenable, as different tribes and ethnic groups attempt to carve out their own territorial spaces.
And the conflict in Ukraine mobilizes the long-simmering frustration felt by ethnic Russians who were left behind when the Soviet Union collapsed.
The third potential source of conflict consists in the fundamental cultural differences created by societies’ unique histories and institutional arrangements.
Despite accounting for only one-eighth of the world’s population, the United States and Europe have long enjoyed economic dominance – accounting for half of global GDP – and disproportionate international influence.
But, as new economic powerhouses rise, they will increasingly challenge the West, and not just for market share and resources; they will seek to infuse the global order with their own cultural understandings and frames of reference.
Of course, competition for resources will also be important, especially as the consequences of the fourth factor – climate change – manifest themselves.
Many countries and regions are already under severe water stress, which will only intensify as climate change causes natural disasters and extreme weather events like droughts to become increasingly common.
Likewise, as forests and marine resources are depleted, competition for food could generate conflict.
This kind of conflict directly contradicts the promise of globalization – namely, that access to foreign food and energy would enable countries to concentrate on their comparative advantages.
If emerging conflicts and competitive pressures lead to, say, economic sanctions or the obstruction of key trade routes, the resulting balkanization of global trade would diminish globalization’s benefits substantially.
