The Security Council might agree to recommend several candidates from which the General Assembly would select one.
Alternatively, the General Assembly might propose several candidates to the Security Council, from which the Council would choose one to refer back to the Assembly for approval.
Either way, the selection process would benefit from greater transparency.
For example, the General Assembly should hold public hearings in which candidates are interviewed, thereby greatly enhancing the stature of the candidate who is eventually selected.
Such proposals, if accepted, would help resolve the current dispute to everyone’s satisfaction.
Indeed, they could make the UN stronger than it has ever been.
A New Dawn for Chinese Journalism?
A remarkable incident has emboldened Chinese journalists.
Earlier this year, the government suspended publication of the newspaper Bing Dian Weekly , provoking unprecedented open protest, which received extensive media coverage worldwide.
Even more surprisingly, the government, under the pressure of public opinion, has allowed Bing Dian to resume publication.
The editor-in-chief and deputy editor-in-chief were sacked, but the open questioning of the legitimacy of the government’s authority to regulate journalism is bound to have a profound impact.
Foreign observers are prone to associate the Bing Dian incident with other recent crackdowns on China’s mass media, and to conclude that Chinese journalism freedom is hopeless under the present autocratic regulation.
Undeniably, there has been no significant change in the government’s system of journalism’s regulation since China adopted its “open door” policy almost 30 years ago.
On the contrary, it has become more rigorous and covert.
But I still have faith that subtle changes are occurring.
A prerequisite of effective control of the media is that the controlled accept the controller’s ideology.
After 1949, the Communist Party cultivated a stable of “theoretical experts” and other ideological servants to write lengthy articles propagating “Marxism and Mao Zedong Thought.”
But nowadays, such writers are hard to find, and their work is received by readers with mockery and sarcasm.
In fact, the Central Propaganda Department’s ideological control can be maintained only through internal notices and telephone calls, which are widely scorned.
More importantly, even the regulators themselves have ceased to believe in obsolete and rigid doctrines.
I recently met an official working for a provincial Department of Propaganda and was impressed by his bold and straightforward comments on current affairs.
In private conversation, one might even take him for a liberal – one of a new breed of young and well-educated propaganda officials with an increasingly higher threshold of political sensitivity.
For their part, producers of news have long since ceased to believe that news is propaganda.
I started my career with
Indeed, Western works are taught as “models for writing” to journalism students in China’s universities.
This is a crucial change, and it is the fundamental reason for an increasing number of genuine news items and commentaries in China’s media today.
Market pressure has also been important in pushing Chinese media to embrace change.
Contrary to foreign perceptions, only a handful of Chinese media – for example,
To be sure, political information remains rigorously controlled, which puts a premium on “harmless” recreational, entertainment, and sports information – the reporting of which is basically free.
This has resulted, in the short run, in an embrace of low journalistic standards.
But many metropolitan newspapers that once thrived on infotainment have seen their circulation fall in recent years.
Sooner or later, readers will start to buy newspapers that can truly inform them and give voice to their opinions.
In fact, it is these tabloids, responding to market pressure, that have started to take on responsibility as public watchdogs.
On many occasions in recent years, they have been the first to break sensitive news.
As a result, mainstream media are being marginalized, and the previously marginalized media are becoming mainstream.
Thus, even without any change in the current system of regulation, extensive coverage of disasters, judicial abuses, and citizens’ pursuit of their statutory rights, along with the questioning of policies from public perspectives, is now common.
For example, reporting by the
Such progress is slow and full of frustrations, for it reflects the incremental evolution of the system.
But it is nonetheless real progress, indicating the growing influence of the Chinese media and pointing to China’s becoming a country of “free expression”.
According to an old Chinese saying, “a just cause enjoys abundant support, while an unjust cause finds scant support.”
A “just cause” resides in people’s hearts.
Without the hearts of news producers – or, increasingly, of censors – the seemingly formidable edifice of journalistic regulation will, sooner or later, collapse like the Berlin Wall.
A New Deal for Fragile States
PARIS – Today, roughly one-quarter of the world’s population lives in conflict-affected and fragile states.
Despite vast sums of money spent aiding such states over the last 50 years, armed conflict and violence continue to blight the lives of millions of people around the world.
International and national partners must radically change the way they engage such states.
I experienced firsthand the need for a new approach in 2004 in Sri Lanka.
Within the first two months of the devastating tsunami that struck that December, close to 50 heads of state and foreign ministers visited the island.
Each came with their own programs, their own civil-society organizations, and their own television crews.
Few came with any deep understanding of the dynamics of the political conflict between militant Tamils and the Sri Lankan state.
Big mistakes were made, fueling further violence.
Our major challenge today is to move away from the model of partnership according to which priorities, policies, and funding needs are determined in donor capitals and development partners’ headquarters.
Conflict-affected states need to be able to determine their own destinies.
We should establish models of post-conflict transition like the one advocated by the g7+, a group of eighteen fragile states.
The model is simple: Countries assess their own situation, using tools that they develop and that are appropriate to the context, in order to formulate a vision and a plan to consolidate peace and achieve prosperity.
This may sound like pie in the sky, but we have already tasted it in Africa, where Sierra Leone’s Agenda for Prosperity 2013-2017 and the Liberia Vision 2030 exemplify the potential of such programs.
Progress on meeting national priorities such as peace consolidation, expanding access to justice, or increasing security is monitored locally.
Using local systems and capacities, it turns out, can strengthen them.
The “New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States,” which builds on a series of international commitments regarding aid and development, and was endorsed at the at the Fourth High-Level Forum on Aid Effectiveness in Busan, South Korea in 2011, proposes just such a model.
It enshrines what matters most in building peaceful states and societies: commitments – the Peace- and State-building Goals – to improve how national and international partners engage in conflict-affected and fragile contexts.
The New Deal recognizes what the history of peace-building teaches us: national leadership and ownership of agendas are key to achieving visible and sustainable results.
As Kosti Manibe Ngai, South Sudan’s finance minister, has put it, “Nothing about us without us.”
In many conversations with South Sudan’s president, Salva Kiir, we have discussed setting out a short list of clear priorities for the new state.
But such goals are meaningful only if a fragile state’s partners are ready to accept the lead from a capital like Juba rather than from their own headquarters.
More than 40 countries and institutions have endorsed the New Deal way of working, committing themselves to building better partnerships – and to investing the required resources and political capital.
This is why the New Deal model is innovative; it creates political support around issues that need to be addressed if countries are to make the transition from conflict and fragility to peace and stability.
Supporting inclusive political dialogue and ensuring that conflict is resolved through peaceful means are the highest priorities, as are security, access to justice, and a dynamic private sector that generates sufficient job opportunities.
Moreover, many fragile states are rich in natural resources, and must establish transparent resource management – aimed at curbing corruption and controlling illicit flows of money and goods – in order to raise the revenues needed to deliver services.
A focus on these processes would ensure that fragile states take the lead and the responsibility.
As partners, we must accept this national leadership.
After Haiti’s catastrophic earthquake in 2010, the country was dubbed “the republic of NGOs.”
Unable to create conditions in which Haitians themselves could take the lead in rebuilding their country, Haiti’s external partners undermined the establishment of a functioning internal governance system.
So, how can we translate our commitments and priorities into better lives for people who are affected by conflict and fragility?
OECD countries need to lead by example and meet the commitments that they have made.
Our partners, through groupings like the g7+, must continue to demand the changes in policies and practices that have been promised.
We also must plan to change for the long term.
As the Millennium Development Goals’ 2015 end date approaches, promotion of peace, security, and non-violent conflict resolution continues to be vitally important, and must be fully integrated into any future development agenda.
Recently, the members of the International Dialogue on Peacebuilding and Statebuilding, the high-level political forum that produced the New Deal, met in Washington, DC, to assess our progress in changing how we work and in implementing the New Deal commitments.
They agreed to the Washington Communiqué, which urges development partners, g7+ countries, and civil-society organizations to intensify their efforts to use the New Deal to deliver concrete results on the ground, and calls for a post-2015 development agenda that recognizes the universal importance of peace- and state-building.
Ultimately, our progress depends on the resolve of everyone to transform the lives of the 1.5 billion people whose lives are marred by violence, conflict, and insecurity.
A New Deal for the Lisbon Strategy
Whatever happened to the European Union’s Lisbon Strategy?
Not only is the public almost entirely ignorant of the EU’s policy agenda for boosting competitiveness, economic growth, and employment, but this ignorance extends to many intellectuals, academics, CEO’s, and even some MP’s.
For example, in all of the debates on the EU’s constitutional treaty, neither its supporters nor its opponents have so much as mentioned the Lisbon Strategy.
It is little wonder, then, that Euroskepticism – in France, the Netherlands, and elsewhere – is on the rise.
Despite the success and popularity of programs like ERASMUS, citizens don’t perceive the EU’s contribution to superior education or training.
Indeed, the last Eurobarometer survey on the Lisbon Strategy found that the European public sees little relation between EU policies and economic competitiveness.
Of course, some laboratories receive EU grants, but without recognizing a specific European mission in research policies.
Europe is generally considered more a constraint than as a plan, more as an instrument than a vision nourished by a clear and credible idea.
The essential responsibility for this state of affairs lies with Europe’s ruling class and policymakers.
As a recent assessment by former Dutch prime minister Wim Kok pointed out, the EU’s member states generally have not made the Lisbon Strategy a high priority, and they balk at giving the EU the means to pursue more ambitious policies to offset this neglect.
It is difficult to ask citizens to be enthusiastic about aims that their leaders ignore.
At bottom, the problem is one of legitimacy.
The main targets – jobs, growth, and research – are considered legitimate from the standpoint of fairness when described in general terms.
But the concrete policies needed to realize this aim are not, since reforming the welfare state and labor markets means more competition, which scares many citizens.
Legitimacy is even more problematic regarding recognition, which implies a feeling of community and attachment.
When we are faced with conflicting choices – burden-sharing through taxation, the organization of the public sector, the status of public employees, etc. – the member states are considered to be the only bodies entitled to decide.
In short, when the EU brings subsidies, it receives congratulations; but when it pushes for unpopular reforms, it becomes the scapegoat for political, social, and economic failures.
From an economic point of view, the Lisbon Strategy’s aim is to transform Europe into a power able to compete on equal terms with the US today and the great Asian countries.
But this aim does not appear to be creating a European identity, as the euro has.
Within many states, “power” isn’t politically correct.
Above all, there is no linkage between national power and European power.
If we want Europe to be more legitimate, we must explain how to tie these two dimensions of power.
Aside from ignorance of the Lisbon Strategy among the public and inaction on long-term reforms among the member states, a second problem concerns the lack of acceptance of the virtues of competition – the most effective way to ensure quality, innovation, and low prices for consumers.
Competition also puts an end to rent seeking and protection of traditional corporate advantages.
Of course, we must limit the scope of competition: there is no reason, for example, to extend it to taxation.
Similarly, while competition will improve the quality of research and education, this does not imply reduced public funding, a lower priority for basic research, or the elimination of scholarships.
Perhaps most importantly, competition is a powerful means to restore democracy and modernize political institutions by compelling policymakers to ensure transparency and accountability.
Elites must give up their privileges, and regulations on corporate governance must limit collusion between managers and civil servants or politicians.
We must explain to citizens Europe’s contribution to public ethics, and the democratic virtues of fair competition in economic, political, and social life.
Consider one of the main purposes of the Lisbon Strategy: the organization of research and higher education.
It is impossible to change radically the way scholars and research workers are appointed in most member states, and to revise completely the criteria for funding of faculties and laboratories. But the EU can overcome national impediments by developing exemplary universities and research centers that would be properly European, serving as an incentive to quality and reform at the national level.
Emulation through excellence is the motor of competitiveness.
A good place to start is an idea supported by French Socialist leader Dominique Strauss-Kahn, who has proposed that 0.25% of Europe’s GDP be dedicated to research and used to create a European Agency for Research.
Moreover, Europe must build up tools for strategic analysis, assessment, and forecasting to provoke and nourish public debate.
Such think tanks at the European level must remain free and independent, but leaders must learn to pay attention to and integrate their recommendations into the policy-making process.
In many matters pertaining to the Lisbon Strategy, the EU cannot avoid member states’ concerns.
But as the states won’t be able to do everything alone and won’t renounce maintaining political control, we must be able to link the Union’s policies and those of specific states.
Otherwise, the Lisbon Strategy could merely empower an inefficient bureaucracy, rather than boosting the EU’s democratic legitimacy.
In short, the Lisbon Strategy could lead Europe to become a real power in the coming decades, or it could fuel further growth of Euroskepticism.
A New Democratic Agenda for Russia
MOSCOW – When Russian President Dmitri Medvedev delivered his annual address to the Federal Assembly I was struck by the fact that his speech seemed to be meant for an advanced, prosperous country, not the real Russia of today.
Russia will hold a presidential election in 2012.
What happens in 2011 will, in my opinion, be even more important than the election itself.
Indeed, the evolution of Russian society could transform Russian politics, despite those domestic opponents who deny change or those who unqualifiedly classify Russia as “incorrigibly authoritarian.”
But, in order for that to happen, a new agenda for Russia must be developed this year.
A decade ago, defense of Russia’s territorial integrity and restoration of governability topped the list of priorities.
People supported a president, Vladimir Putin, who was devoted to this “stabilization” agenda.
We may debate the means by which it was pursued, and how successfully, but Russia’s “existential” challenges were largely overcome.
But progress on stabilization only highlighted Russia’s unresolved problems, which the global financial crisis exacerbated, but did not cause.
After all, Russia’s resource-based, de-industrializing, expenditure-driven economy is the result of purely domestic choices.
Nor was it the crisis that gave rise to corruption, which affects officialdom at all levels, or that caused Russia to lose its democratic dynamic.
We Russians rode along on oil and gas, forgetting that these resources will not last forever.
But, even with favorable world market conditions, we did not manage to solve the problem of poverty, in which millions of Russians still live.
I am convinced that Russia’s troubles all come down to politics.
We need a democratic, competitive environment, initiative at all levels, an active civil society, and real public control.
Only under such conditions will difficult problems lend themselves to solution.
But, starting in 2005-2006, the authorities implemented measures that made responsiveness to acute problems practically impossible.
The decisions to appoint, rather than elect, regional governors, to introduce party-list voting, to raise the electoral threshold for parties to enter the Duma, and to repeal the minimum-turnout requirement – all accompanied by rampant manipulation of elections and the mass media – created a political system closed to feedback from society.
Not surprisingly, the political elite became self-absorbed and served only its own narrow interests.
This summer, with wildfires raging outside Moscow, the elite’s isolation took on a menacing nature.
But something else happened: society became more demanding, recognizing its own interests and knowing how to express them.
Although the traditions of self-organization in Russian society are neither deep nor strong, real movement in this direction became visible for all to see.
Activists from public movements, journalists, ecologists, businessmen, and ordinary people who had suffered the tyranny and corruption of public officials began to join in.
The authorities have recognized this, at least to some degree.
Medvedev's decision to suspend construction of a highway through the Khimki forest near Moscow in the face of widespread civic protest was important.
For many months, Moscow and federal authorities ignored the highway’s opponents, so Medvedev’s decision was a signal: contempt for the people is inadmissible.
Yet right after that, the bureaucracy tried to turn the public hearings – called to give people and civil institutions a voice in solving such problems – into an empty formality.
So the struggle between democratic and anti-democratic tendencies is becoming acute.
If the anti-democratic tendencies win out, all that we have accomplished in previous years will be jeopardized – including stability itself.
This threat evidently motivated Medvedev to speak out in November: “It is no secret,” Medvedev wrote in his blog, “that, as of a certain period, symptoms of stagnation have begun to appear in our political life, and the threat of turning stability into a factor of stagnation has appeared.”
The president’s statement was unexpected.
Medvedev’s assessment attested to his understanding that Russia’s problems are rooted in its politics – in the degradation of the ruling party, in the absence of a real opposition, and in the lack of respect for the rights of political minorities.
I welcome Medvedev’s emphasis on social concerns and his anti-bureaucratic rhetoric.
But his statements are only a first step toward formulating a new Russian agenda, the first point of which must be a renewal and acceleration of movement toward real and effective democracy.
It is vital that Russians believe that Medvedev’s words reflect his priorities, and that he is prepared to fight for them.
Among these priorities, one of the most important is education.
We have approached the point when the constitutional requirement of universal, free education may become a fiction.
People are asking: How is it that, after World War II, the state had enough money to provide free education, whereas today’s Russian state does not?
Society also demands effective mechanisms for combating corruption, which is turning into a serious political problem, precisely because it has widened the gap between the people and the authorities.
Indeed, today’s elite cannot or will not solve the problem.
Only a serious presidential initiative, supported by civil society and brave new political forces, can do the job.
The new agenda must also include a strong economic component.
Patching up holes in the budget and individual initiatives are not enough to ensure economic renewal.
Russia needs a breakthrough toward an up-to-date, knowledge-based, and ecologically sustainable economy.
Here, I see a direct connection with the problem of education.
I am convinced that Medvedev must become the leader in the process of formulating the new Russian agenda, and he must act in the coming year.
Society will support him.
A New Era for Islamic Science?
For a few hundred years, when science and mathematics were enjoying a period of great invention, one region of the world stood out.
Masters of these disciplines were revered there, medicine advanced quickly, and the average person was curious about how nature worked.
Not surprisingly, this region was globally respected.
In the other half of the known planet, scientists were punished, even killed.
Mathematics was outlawed as irreligious and alien, and was later made subservient to religion.
The standard of living was low.
The prosperous region was the Islamic Middle East, while an ignorant Europe remained poor.
Both regions were religiously governed (historians differ about the role and natures of the religions in this context), but science flourished only in one of them.
Now, of course the roles of the Islamic Middle East and the West are reversed.
Since World War II, the United States has been the world’s undisputed leader in science.
Throughout this period, the brightest students were drawn away from their native lands, attracted by superior research universities and opportunities.
Until recently, more than half of all mathematics, science, and engineering graduate students in the US were foreign-born.
Many of these talents stayed after graduation, and both industry and government took advantage of this.
Meanwhile, Islamic cultures entered a historical phase in which science was equated with Western influence and eschewed.
Even in countries where oil revenues could fuel a significant amount of research, Arab rulers did not encourage such investment, with the result that their societies have not prospered as much as they might have.
Recently, a desire for greater political respect has spurred Islamic nations to invest in technology, which is most visible in Pakistani and Iranian nuclear ambitions.
But while such weapons carry political weight, the science behind them is mundane and old.
More meaningful is the respect that comes from incubating insights, rather than the products of past discoveries.
Imagine the influence that would be generated by a Pakistani institute that was the world leader in cancer research.
Would the political rhetoric shift if researchers in Oman discovered a key to suppressing AIDS?
This is one unclaimed opportunity.
But another exists, and not just for Islamic societies.
The US has made profound missteps recently.
“Matters of faith” have been substituted for science across government, from the president down.
Top researchers have had their reports changed by political operatives when the facts contradicted official belief.
Encouraged by a religiously influenced administration, school systems are shifting their focus from science to “values.”
Since the terrorist attacks of September 2001, entry visas are fewer and more difficult to obtain, stanching the flow of young talent into US universities.
Major scientific organizations have protested, without result.
At the same time, tax laws have been revised to make investors wealthier in the near term, discouraging long-term investment in research.
Building a knowledge-based economy using oil wealth is clearly possible.
For example, Texas, like most southern US states, was once economically poor and declining.
Although it had oil revenue, the flow of dollars into an economy, by itself, does not boost prosperity as much as one might think.
So Texas decided to devote its oil money to an educational endowment.
Today, that endowment is roughly equal to that of Harvard University and spread over 15 universities.
The effect has been staggering: aerospace manufacturing has almost disappeared from California, but is booming in Texas.
Telecom research centers and consortia have flocked to Texas, even from the Canadian telecommunications giant Nortel.
Although manufacturing in the US is in crisis, Texas has one of the strongest manufacturing economies in the world.
There is no reason that the same outcome could not be achieved in the Middle East.
First, however, the Islamic world must rediscover and embrace its proud heritage.
­A New European Growth Agenda
BRUSSELS – Austerity alone cannot solve Europe's economic and financial crisis.
Growth and jobs need to be promoted with equal zeal.
European Union leaders now recognize this: kick-starting growth in 2012 was high on the agenda at the European Council’s meeting on January 30.
But the big question remains: How?
The need for immediate action is clear.
The eurozone’s economy contracted in the last three months of 2011; even Germany’s shrank.
The new year is looking grim.
France is flat-lining (as is Britain).
Italy and Spain have sunk into deep recession.
Greece is in its fifth year of a slump.
And eurozone unemployment is at record highs, with nearly one in two young people jobless in Spain and Greece.
The economic headwinds are formidable: fiscal austerity, high interest rates outside AAA-rated countries, credit cutting by banks, deleveraging households, weak private-sector investment, and declining exports as the global slowdown undermines demand.
Until growth resumes, any tentative financial stabilization will be extremely fragile.
Recession will hit banks’ and governments’ already-weak balance sheets, increasing pressure for faster deleveraging.
But, while gradual adjustment is essential, faster and deeper cuts are largely self-defeating: big reductions in private credit and government spending will cause a sharper slowdown – and thus a vicious downward spiral.
A big new push for growth is therefore vital.
So far, the growth agenda has consisted largely of structural reforms, which are essential for boosting future productivity and flexibility.
The crisis does provide a political opportunity for bold moves on this front in many countries; but structural reforms generally will not generate growth and jobs immediately (one exception is permitting shops to open longer).
On the contrary, a shakeout of less productive jobs, for example, would at first raise unemployment, increase government outlays, and reduce private spending.
And, because demand is depressed, credit is in short supply, and barriers to enterprise are often high, it will take longer than usual for businesses to create more productive jobs.
In short, structural reforms alone cannot be relied upon to stimulate growth in 2012.
Instead, the immediate focus needs to be on boosting investment and exports in economies with a current-account deficit – such as France, Italy, and Spain (and the United Kingdom) – and stimulating consumption in surplus countries such as Germany and the Netherlands.
The European Central Bank has acted decisively to prop up European banks; now it needs to support the real economy, too.
While official interest rates are only 1%, solvent sovereigns such as Spain pay more than 5% to borrow for ten years, while creditworthy businesses in Italy can borrow only at punitive rates, if at all.
So the ECB should do more to unblock the transmission mechanism for monetary policy; the European Banking Authority should discourage excessive deleveraging by insisting that banks raise specific capital amounts rather than hit a uniform 9% ratio; and, where necessary, national governments should provide guarantees for bank lending to small and medium-size businesses.
While improving access to finance is vital, governments also need to do more to boost investment.
They should prioritize measures to make it easier to start a business, lift barriers to venture capital, and introduce temporary 100% capital allowances to encourage businesses to bring forward investment.
At the EU level, the (callable) capital of the European Investment Bank should be greatly increased, as European Commission President José Manuel Barroso suggested in his State of the Union speech last September, so that the EIB can finance a big wave of pan-European investment, notably in infrastructure.
Boosting exports is also essential.
Deficit countries need to become more competitive, increasing productivity while cutting costs.
A more competitive currency would be welcome: just as the sterling’s collapse since 2008 has lifted UK exports, a weaker euro would help Mediterranean economies regain competitiveness for price-sensitive exports.
A fiscal devaluation – slashing payroll taxes and replacing the revenues with a higher VAT – would also help.
Surplus countries, too, must do their part, which is in their own interest.
Just as China needs to allow the renminbi to rise, so Germany – whose current-account surplus exceeds China's both as a share of GDP and in absolute terms – needs a higher real exchange rate.
That means that Germans need to earn higher wages, commensurate with their increased productivity, so that they can afford more Greek and Spanish holidays.
If businesses will not oblige, an income-tax cut would do the trick.
That brings us to fiscal policy.
Governments that cannot borrow cheaply (or at all) from markets have no option but to tighten their belts.
But they should pursue smart consolidation rather than unthinking austerity.
So they should maintain investment in skills and infrastructure, while cutting subsidies and transfer payments.
They should also legislate now for future reforms, notably to encourage people to work longer.
Last but not least, governments that can borrow at unprecedentedly low rates – 0% in real terms over 10 years in the case of Germany – must play their role in supporting demand.
Would it be really be so difficult to see VAT coming down ahead of the German election next year?
A New Holy Alliance?
LONDON &#45;&#45; The recent meeting in the Vatican of the “Custodian of The Holy Places,” King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia, and Pope Benedict XVI was a seminal event, particularly as it comes at a time when radical Muslims are decrying the role of “crusaders” in Middle East politics.
It was also the clearest sign yet of a rising “Holy Alliance” among the world’s conservative leaders.
For the key audience for this meeting of Muslim king and Roman Catholic Pontiff was not their followers, but another conservative leader, President George W. Bush.
The first “Holy Alliance” was a creation of Austria’s Prince Metternich following the Napoleonic wars.
It was an attempt to preserve the peace (and the security of the relatively weak Austrian Empire) through a coalition of victors upholding shared values.
Metternich’s “Holy Alliance” was the one original political idea to emerge from Napoleon’s defeat.
Behind its exalted name lay an innovation of great diplomatic significance: the introduction of an element of calculated moral restraint into international relations.
The vested interests that the Alliance members – Austria, Prussia, and Russia – had in the survival of their domestic institutions led each to seek to avoid conflicts that, in the past, they would have pursued as a matter of course.
Metternich’s system worked through much of the nineteenth century, because it protected a genuine balance of power between countries that shared common values.
But what “common values” do King, Pope, and American President share?
That such a meeting took place is a sign that both Pope and King believed that there was something to achieve.
Indeed, Abdullah, who believes himself to be the paramount leader of the Muslim world, is the first Saudi king to initiate a meeting with a leader of the Christian faith.
The two men met, seemingly as equals, not to express the common values of conservatism, but to confirm and promote their authority to uphold traditional values.
Both agreed that reform must be slow, cautious and that it must never undermine established institutions, especially religion and the patriarchal family.
Abdullah sought the meeting because he believes that the world since 2001 has divided the fraternity of conservatives.
Until then, he and Bush shared a common worldview, emphasizing the importance of religion, the traditional family (as both countries understood it), social discipline, and the state’s role in supporting these institutions.
But Bush, following the terrorist attacks of 2001, turned his back on conservatism.  He sought to radically reinvent the Middle East, not only by overthrowing the Taliban regime in Afghanistan and Saddam Hussein’s regime in Iraq, but also through his strident calls for democratization.
American radicalism, however, resulted in increasing tensions between religious communities in the Middle East, and the rise of radical Iran with its bid for regional hegemony.
Since 2001, Christian minorities have been targeted throughout the region, including even Lebanon’s Maronite Christian community.
And in Iraq, Sunni Muslims feel under siege from the country’s majority and now ruling Shia.
Here is where the Holy Alliance concept of moral restraint comes in.
Abdullah, perhaps earlier than most others, understood that some code of restraint was needed if the entire region was not to descend into a war of all against all.
Moreover, Abdullah understands that his wobbly regime will only be able to withstand the radical gales that are now blowing if it can forge the type of stability-seeking alliance that Metternich built.
The King, like Metternich and the Austrian Kaisers, understands de Tocqueville’s dictum that the most dangerous moment for a regime is when it starts to reform.
Having begun, ever so carefully, to politically open his country, the King knows that he needs regional peace and a lowering of Islamic holy rage.
The problem is that Abdullah cannot rely on his domestic conservative allies to give him the time that the Kingdom needs.
The Wahhabi religious establishment, the Saudi state’s hidden co-rulers, could very well obstruct Abdullah’s attempts at regional religious reconciliation.
Members of the religious police remain adamant that the country’s Christian guests must continue to live according to strict Wahhabi rules of behavior.
While the Wahhabis could yet be bribed again with oil money, the sect’s power-hungry judges eagerly await the next beheading, stoning, or lashing in Riyadh’s public square.
Thus, uniting the forces of status quo conservatism, even if some of those conservatives are Christian, is the only viable diplomatic strategy open to Saudi Arabia.
For conservative rulers usually fall when they fail to grasp their own vulnerability, especially when the revolutionary challenge is cloaked in conservative garb.
After all, few political systems can defend against those, like Saudi Arabia’s Islamic radicals, who claim that they can preserve the system and its religious values more effectively than the current rulers. 
Only an alliance of conservative leaders and powers (including a retreat by America from diplomatic radicalism), Abdullah believes, can restore some stability to the Middle East.
A Glimmer of Hope in Iran
BERLIN – No one could have reckoned with Hassan Rowhani’s victory in Iran’s presidential election.
Even Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei was probably more than a little surprised by Rowhani’s first-round victory, following a campaign that began with eight candidates.
As a result, the negotiations with Iran over its nuclear program, as well as the civil war in Syria, may well take on a new dynamic.
But that is how it is in the Middle East: you never know what lies around the corner.
This year marks the tenth anniversary of the launch, at the foreign-minister level, of negotiations between Iran and the European triumvirate of Germany, France, and the United Kingdom on Iran’s nuclear program.
I was there, representing Germany; so was Rowhani, who led the Iranian delegation.
The talks have continued until today – in an expanded format that includes Germany and the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council (the P5+1) – without any tangible results.
Now Rowhani returns to the risky business of Iran’s nuclear program, though this time as President.
What can we – and he – expect?
Based on my personal experience, Rowhani is a polite and open character.
Unlike outgoing President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, he surrounds himself with very skillful and experienced diplomats.
But there should be no doubt that he is a man of the regime – a realist and moderate member of the Islamic Republic’s political elite – not a representative of the opposition.
And, of course, he backs Iran’s nuclear program.
If Rowhani wants to succeed in office, he will have to keep his promise to improve Iranians’ living conditions without endangering the Islamic Republic in the process.
That will not be easy; in fact, it could amount to trying to square a circle.
The economic improvement that voters demanded in electing Rowhani can almost certainly be achieved only if Western and international sanctions are lifted.
But an end to international sanctions presupposes a breakthrough in the nuclear negotiations.
It may also presuppose at least a temporary settlement of the main regional conflicts.
The Middle East has changed dramatically in the last ten years.
America has reduced its involvement, having withdrawn its troops from Iraq and winding down its engagement in Afghanistan by next year.
At the same time, we are witnessing the dissolution of the old Middle East created by France and Britain after World War I, when Europe’s two great colonial powers created territorial mandates in Palestine, Syria (including present-day Lebanon), Transjordan, and Iraq.
A new regional order is not yet discernible, which points to a future fraught with risk and possible chaos.
As Iran seeks to assert its influence and interests, as well as those of its Shia allies, its dispute with the Security Council over its nuclear program has become closely tied to its regional ambitions.
After all, the prospect of a nuclear-armed Iran would most likely exacerbate violent conflict and a nuclear arms race in the region.
As a result, both issues may well have to be addressed successfully prior to any move to lift the sanctions.
Iran and its international interlocutors should learn from the past and manage expectations accordingly.
There will not be any quick solutions (if, indeed, there are any solutions at all), given the parties’ diametrically opposed interests, their respective domestic and alliance-related obstacles, and a profound lack of trust on all sides.
Moreover, aside from negotiating with the P5+1, Iran would be well advised to launch direct negotiations with the United States.
It will also most likely have to improve its relations with Saudi Arabia and the Gulf states, and change its behavior toward Israel, if a positive result is to be achieved.
Similarly, the West will have to understand that the Islamic Republic is not a monolithic dictatorship.
The regime has multiple coexisting power centers, which influence and limit each other’s decisions.
The office of the president is just one power center.
The same applies to the Supreme Leader, who, despite his title, is not an absolute ruler.
Iran has tried two political approaches in the last ten years: a reformist model, under President Mohamed Khatami, and hardline radicalism, under Ahmadinejad.
Both approaches failed.
The reformers could not overcome conservative opposition, while the radicals could not defeat the domestic economic realities wrought by their foreign and nuclear policies.
Rowhani must seek a path that does not cost him the support of the majority of the regime’s power centers, yet that also allows him to fulfill the mandate he received from voters.
At home, too, massive distrust will further complicate an inherently difficult task.
In America and the West, many will probably regard Rowhani as the friendly face of the Islamic Republic, whereas Ahmadinejad was its true – because more radical – embodiment.
Many Iranians, in turn, regard Obama as the friendly face of a US that still seeks regime change in their country, whereas his predecessor, George W. Bush, was America’s more honest – because more radical – representative.
Both perceptions distort reality, though both contain a kernel of truth.
Despite these perceptions – or perhaps precisely because of them – Rowhani’s presidency offers an unexpected opportunity for both the nuclear negotiations and a political solution in Syria.
Iran’s participation in an international peace conference is an absolute necessity, if only to test Rowhani’s seriousness.
During the Afghanistan conference in Bonn in 2001, Iran behaved in a pragmatic, results-oriented way – an approach that went completely unrewarded by the US.
As for the nuclear negotiations, the P5+1 will focus on objective guarantees that leave Iran no path toward military use of its nuclear capabilities.
For Iran, the focal point of its efforts will be recognition of its right to civilian use of nuclear energy, in keeping with the provisions of the Non-Proliferation Treaty and its protocols.
Both issues sound simpler than they are: the devil is in the details, and the details leave ample scope for disagreement over the definition, monitoring, and enforcement of terms.
Again, maintaining realistic expectations must be paramount.
A successful outcome in the nuclear negotiations and resolution or even containment of the main regional conflicts will be difficult to achieve.
But it would be the height of irresponsibility not to seize the unexpected opportunity created by Rowhani’s election with all the strength, good faith, and creativity we can muster.
A Second Chance for European Reform
MUNICH – The European Central Bank has managed to calm the markets with its promise of unlimited purchases of eurozone government bonds, because it effectively assured bondholders that the taxpayers and pensioners of the eurozone’s still-sound economies would, if necessary, shoulder the repayment burden.
Although the ECB left open how this would be carried out, its commitment whetted investors’ appetite, reduced interest-rate spreads in the eurozone, and made it possible to reduce the funding of crisis-stricken economies through the printing press (Target credit).
This respite offers an ideal opportunity to push forward with reforms.
Greek Prime Minister Antonis Samaras must convince his countrymen that he is serious about implementing them.
Spanish Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy and Portuguese Finance Minister Vitor Gaspar deserve more support for their plans.
And one can only hope that Italy’s caretaker prime minister, Mario Monti, contests the next general election.
All of these leaders understand what must be done.
France, by contrast, does not appear to have noticed the writing on the wall.
President François Hollande wants to solve his country’s problems with growth programs.
But when politicians say “growth,” they mean “borrowing.”
That is the last thing that France needs.
France’s debt/GDP ratio is already around 90%; even if its 2013 budget deficit does not exceed 3.5% of GDP, its debt/GDP ratio will have climbed to 93% by the end of the year.
The government’s GDP share, at 56%, is the highest in the eurozone and second highest among all developed countries.
It is not only film actors like Gérard Depardieu who are leaving the country to escape its high taxes; industry is fleeing as well.
France’s once-proud carmakers are fighting for survival.
Indeed, France’s manufacturing industry has shrunk to barely 9% of GDP, less than Britain’s manufacturing share (10%) and less than half of Germany’s (20%).
Its current account is sliding into an ever-deeper deficit hole.
Unemployment is rising to record levels.
France’s basic problem, like that of the countries most affected by the crisis, is that the wave of cheap credit that the euro’s introduction made possible fueled an inflationary bubble that robbed it of its competitiveness.
Goldman Sachs has calculated that France must become 20% cheaper to service its debt on a sustainable basis.
The same is true of Spain, while Italy would have to become 10-15% cheaper and Greece and Portugal would need domestic prices to fall 30% and 35%, respectively.
The OECD purchasing-power statistics paint a similar picture, with Greece needing to depreciate by 39% and Portugal by 32% just to reach the price level prevailing in Turkey.
But, so far, virtually nothing has been done in this respect.
Worse, some of the troubled countries’ inflation rates are still running higher than those of their trading partners.
Eurozone politicians tend to believe that it is possible to regain competitiveness by carrying out reforms, undertaking infrastructure projects, and improving productivity, but without reducing domestic prices.
That is a fallacy, because such steps improve competitiveness only in the same measure as they reduce domestic prices vis-à-vis eurozone competitors.
There is no way around a reduction in relative domestic prices as long as these countries remain in the currency union: either they deflate, or their trading partners inflate faster.
There is no easy or socially comfortable way to accomplish this.
In some cases, such a course can be so perilous that it should not be wished upon any society.
The gap is simply too large between what is needed to restore competitiveness and what citizens can stomach if they remain part of the monetary union.
In order to become cheaper, a country’s inflation rate must stay below that of its competitors, but that can be accomplished only through an economic slump.
The more trade unions defend existing wage structures, and the lower productivity growth is, the longer the slump will be.
Spain and France would need a ten-year slump, with annual inflation 2% lower than that of their competitors, to regain their competitiveness.
For Italy, the path toward competitiveness is shorter, but for Portugal and Greece it is substantially longer – perhaps too long.
Italy, France, and Spain should be able to regain competitiveness in the eurozone within a foreseeable period of time.
After all, Germany cut its prices relative to its eurozone trading partners by 22% from 1995, when the euro was definitively announced, to 2008, when the global financial crisis erupted.
Ten years ago, Germany was like France is today – the sick man of Europe.
It suffered from increasing unemployment and a lack of investment.
Most of its savings were being invested abroad, and its domestic net investment share was among the lowest of all OECD countries.
Under growing pressure to act, Gerhard Schröder’s Social Democratic government decided in 2003 to deprive millions of Germans of their second-tier unemployment insurance, thus paving the way for the creation of a low-wage sector, in turn reducing the rate of inflation.
Unfortunately, thus far, there is no sign that the crisis countries, above all France, are ready to bite the bullet.
The longer they cling to a belief in magic formulas, the longer the euro crisis will be with us.
A New Science
An unusual meeting of scientists took place in Paris this summer, when scientists gathered to brainstorm about the need for a new science, one that could be as revolutionary as Einstein’s insights were a century ago.
Most scientists assume that the basics of science are known.
After all, today’s models work.
But an emerging group of scientists points to phenomena that current theories do not address well.
These problems are exceedingly common and artfully avoided because the science that would account for them just doesn’t exist.
This missing science would describe processes, and how entire systems evolve.
Individual scientific disciplines are understood fairly well.
Physics, at least the physics we encounter as ordinary humans, is well mapped.
Chemistry and biochemistry are similarly solid -- there are some things we don’t understand about the body, but it is believed that the basic machinery of how cells and molecules interact is known.
Slightly apart from these are the new social sciences, which deal with humans and societies.
In each of these areas -- physics, biochemistry and social science -- the theories are mature and largely uncontroversial.
Each discipline has its own language and its own separate machinery.
Rarely is a scientist an expert in more than one area, because the worlds and languages are so different.
This means that we can’t answer complex questions that depend on more than one field. Consider the brain, for example.
This complex organ is composed of molecules that interact using the principles of physics. That information moves according to the laws of electricity.
There is also a system of specialized cells, and these interact, exchanging chemicals that also convey information.
The interaction between two brains adds another level: here, information is exchanged by means of languages, signs and ideas.
Information is at work on each level and comfortable theories explain how the separate ones operate.
But information is being exchanged between the levels as well.
There is no science that explains this, even at the most rudimentary level.
To cope with this deficiency, some scientists have tried to reinvent the tools of one level in order to apply them to another.
This leads to such things as a “language” at the level of cells and “energy” behind organized societies.
Sometimes the transplant works well enough, but it does not address the central problem: What is the nature of the information conveyed between each level, and how is it conveyed?
As it happens, nearly every system in the world is composed of such layers.
A similarly embarrassing lack of understanding about how the whole system works exists in every case.
The group of interdisciplinary scientists that met in Paris is loosely affiliated under the banner “Foundations of Information Science.”
They have been working in a distributed collaboration for eight years and come from a range of countries and specialties.
As well as scientists from the relevant disciplines, art theorists, psychiatrists, language experts and philosophers are beginning to participate in the discussion.
Most of the group is banking on the “transplant” strategy, in which the basic science of one layer is placed in another, tweaked and supplemented in order to be functional.
Others think that a whole new approach is required.
They assume that many scientific conventions are accidents of history and new abstractions can be devised.
If the FIS group is lucky, there will also be some radical input from thinkers that do not presently have access to first world infrastructure.
Independent thinking is an underestimated factor.
Nearly all the activities collected under the banner of “science” have developed institutional tendencies that are similar to their economic counterparts.
It is usually assumed that developing economies need to build resources that emulate those in the developed world, but this could actually stifle the most creative thinking.
Many scientific disciples are going through a revolution, and a lot of those ideas -- sometimes revolutionary ideas -- are bubbling up from labs and research centers that are unaffiliated with large institutions.
Twenty years of the most advanced thinking for mathematical algorithms came from a Soviet empire starved of computing power.
The cleverest, most literally earth-shattering notions of physics for two generations came not from the expected powerhouses of the day, but from Budapest.
Iran has a tradition of architectural design that has revealed key insights to cognitive scientists.
Today, some of the most radical new ideas in second generation artificial intelligence (so-called “autonomous agents”) are incubating in Prague.
The most creative breakthroughs became famous events.
When Einstein added new abstractions to the language of physics, the identity of space and time changed.
The FIS meeting in July was the unheralded beginning of an attempt to remodel the universe in such a way.
The group identified the gaps that need explanation. They will expand their pool of thinkers to include scientists from necessarily innovative regions.
Following this, they will identify which problems might be solved if this new science is developed. Or if you wish, discovered.
A New Sino-American Relationship?
NEW YORK – The Strategic and Economic Dialogue between the United States and China has now ended with the establishment of a felicitous new atmosphere between the two countries. But how can this “love-in” be made concrete?
The most logical and potentially fruitful area of collaboration is climate change.
Here, the two US government officials best equipped to lead are Secretary of Energy Steven Chu and Secretary of Commerce Gary Locke.
Chu is a former Berkeley and Stanford professor of physics and head of the Lawrence Berkeley National Lab, while Locke is a former Washington State governor and a long-time supporter of US-China commercial exchanges.
Each packs the kind of soft, utilitarian powers of persuasion that Chinese leaders are most willing to embrace: academic degrees from prestigious universities, advanced scientific and technological knowledge, high office, and a Nobel Prize. (Chu is one of five ethnic Chinese to have won a Nobel, although no winner has yet come from the PRC, a fact that gnaws at Chinese pride.)
China’s press was abuzz over Chu and Locke, the first ethnic Chinese men to become US Cabinet Secretaries.
Most major Chinese papers ran Chu’s photo on the front page, with Beijing Business Today running a cautionary headline: “Don’t Mistake the Visiting American Ministers as Relatives!”
The paper went on to warn that, “In their own hearts, we are afraid that Chu and Locke put their priorities in exactly the opposite order.”
When Chu gave speeches on energy and climate change at Tsinghua University, China’s most elite institution for science and engineering (where his parents had been students), and then at Tianjin University (where his grandfather was once President), he was received with enormous enthusiasm, overflow crowds, and standing ovations.
So, the Chinese ended up embracing Chu and Locke in contradictory ways: as high-ranking representatives of the US government and as compatriots with whom they share the common bond of Chinese-ness.
Both Chu and Locke are aware that the US and China are now the world’s largest emitters of greenhouse gases, and that, if there is any hope of remedying global climate change, the two countries must quickly find a way to collaborate.
For, although the US has drawn strength from the ideal of a “melting pot” – and President Barack Obama’s cabinet does represent a new high-water mark for diversity – Americans have often shown a xenophobic distrust of immigrants who have drawn too close to power.
Especially in the case of Chinese, fears of divided national loyalties and “fifth columns” have been strong.
One need only recall the recent case of Wen Ho Lee, the Los Alamos National Laboratory scientist who was unjustly accused of spying, to be reminded of how yin and yang are America’s feelings about minority members in sensitive positions.
There is a second obstruction as well: the US Congress refuses to face up realistically to the climate challenge, because China, as a developing country, is not obliged to accept compulsory carbon limits.
Then, because the US refuses to take responsibility for its cumulative and per capita greenhouse-gas emissions – which are, respectively, roughly four and three times greater than China’s – the Chinese leadership refuses to make concessions.
A standoff ensues, which is where we are now.
China recently demanded that the US reduce its emissions by 40% from its 1990 baseline levels and subsidize emission reduction efforts in China and other developing countries to the tune of .05-1% of America’s GDP.
But the recently House-passed Waxman-Markey bill proposes that the US only cut emissions by 3.6% of 1990 baseline levels.
So it is still far from clear what will actually work to bring about an understanding between the US and China that produces real results.
Moreover, with India poking Secretary of State Hillary Clinton in the eye over her climate-change entreaties, the world could easily see an even more unified and unyielding bloc emerge among developing countries.
The next moment to watch is Obama’s trip to China in November.
Here, if all the expressions of good feeling cannot be made concrete, an incomparable opportunity to recast Sino-US relations around the issue of climate change will have been lost.
A New Start for Non-Proliferation
VIENNA – US President Barack Obama has injected fresh momentum into efforts – stalled for a decade – to bring about nuclear disarmament.
He has committed himself to the vision of a world free of nuclear weapons and acknowledges the link between nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament by the nuclear-weapon states.
Obama has pledged to revitalize the 1970 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), which aims to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons.
The non-proliferation regime, of which the NPT is the cornerstone, is in disarray. The main problems are easily identified.
First, the five main nuclear-weapon states have not taken seriously their NPT obligation to work for nuclear disarmament.
Instead, they have insisted that nuclear weapons are essential for their security and continued to modernize their nuclear arsenals.
This naturally robs them of the moral authority to persuade others not to acquire nuclear weapons, which continue to be perceived as a source of power and influence, and an insurance policy against attack.
Second, as we have seen in the case of North Korea, there is nothing to stop countries that sign the Treaty from simply walking out after declaring that “extraordinary events” have jeopardized their supreme interests.
Third, the International Atomic Energy Agency, which is supposed to police the non-proliferation system, is shamefully underfunded.
When it comes to determining whether or not a country is conducting a covert nuclear weapons program, IAEA inspectors often have their hands tied, either because they lack the legal authority to gain access to all the locations they consider necessary, or because the IAEA’s analytical laboratories are outdated, or because the Agency does not have adequate access to satellite imagery.
Fourth, export controls have failed to prevent the spread of sensitive nuclear technology, not least due to the sophisticated efforts of clandestine networks like the one run by Pakistani nuclear scientist A.Q. Khan.
Nine countries already have nuclear weapons, and it would be naive to presume that others, particularly in regions of conflict, will not try to get hold of them.
In addition, a number of countries with nuclear energy programs have the capability, if they choose, to manufacture nuclear weapons within a matter of months if their security perceptions change, because they have mastered the critical technology – uranium enrichment and plutonium reprocessing.
If more countries take this path, it could prove to be the Achilles’ heel of non-proliferation.
Fifth, the international community, spearheaded by the United Nations Security Council, has more often than not been paralyzed in the face of challenges to international security and ineffectual in responding to suspected cases of nuclear proliferation.
These issues will not be resolved overnight.
But there is much that can be done relatively quickly.
The United States and Russia have started negotiations on deep cuts in their nuclear arsenals, which together account for 95% of the world’s 27,000 warheads.
Other key steps include bringing into force the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty; negotiating a verifiable treaty to end production of fissile material for use in weapons; radically improving the physical security of nuclear and radioactive materials, which is vital to prevent them from falling into the hands of terrorists; and strengthening the IAEA.
Last month, I proposed a key measure to strengthen non-proliferation to the IAEA’s Board of Governors – establishing an IAEA bank of low-enriched uranium (LEU) to guarantee supplies to countries that need nuclear fuel for their power reactors.
LEU cannot be used to make weapons.
Some such mechanism will be essential in the coming decades as more and more countries introduce nuclear energy.
My proposal is to create a physical stockpile of LEU at the disposal of the IAEA as a last-resort reserve for countries with nuclear power programs that face a supply disruption for non-commercial reasons.
This would give countries confidence that they can count on reliable supplies of fuel to run their nuclear power plants, and therefore do not need to develop their own uranium-enrichment or plutonium-reprocessing capability.
This could help to avoid a repeat of Iran’s experiences after its 1979 revolution, when contracts for fuel and technology for its planned nuclear power program were not honored.
Thirty years later, some of the consequences are still being felt.
The LEU would be available to countries in need on the basis of non-political and non-discriminatory criteria.
It would be accessible at market prices to all states in compliance with their nuclear safeguards obligations.
No state would be required to give up the right to develop its own fuel cycle.
The money needed to launch an LEU bank is in place, thanks primarily to a non-governmental organization – the Nuclear Threat Initiative – and initial funding from Warren Buffett.
But this can only be a first step. It should be followed by an agreement that all new enrichment and reprocessing activities will be placed exclusively under multinational control, and that all existing such facilities will be converted from national to multinational control.
This is a bold idea, but bold ideas are needed now more than ever.
The opportunity to put the nuclear fuel cycle under multinational control was missed 60 years ago because of the Cold War.
The spread of nuclear technology and the growing risk of nuclear terrorism make it imperative that we get it right this time.
A New-State Solution for Israel and Palestine
PRINCETON – Imagine a two-state solution in Israel and Palestine in which Palestinians would have the right of return; Israelis could settle wherever they could purchase land in the West Bank; and Jerusalem need not be divided.
This is not a fanciful vision, but a creative and eminently sensible reinvention of twenty-first century statehood.
And US President Barack Obama’s just-completed visit to Israel provides an opportunity to explore genuinely new thinking.
Ever since Bill Clinton nearly succeeded in brokering a comprehensive settlement in 2000, the mantra among supporters of the Israeli-Palestinian peace process has been that, while a solution exists, Israeli and Palestinian leaders who are willing to reach it do not.
For all the dire warnings that the window for a two-state solution is rapidly closing (or has already closed), it is the solution itself that is the problem.
In 2008, a Princeton University graduate student in philosophy named Russell Nieli gave a talk at the Princeton Center for Jewish Life that was so well received that he later expanded it into an article for the US-based magazine Tikkun, founded by Rabbi Michael Lerner.
The article, “Toward a Permanent Palestinian/Israeli Peace – the Case for Two-State Condominialism,” was published with the express aim of stimulating “productive thinking among a younger generation of Jews and Arabs not bound by the restricted vision and failed policies of the past.”
“Two-state condominialism” is as visionary as the name is clunky.
The core idea is that Israelis and Palestinians would be citizens of two separate states and thus would identify with two separate political authorities.
Palestine would be defined as a state of the Palestinian people, and Israel as a Jewish state.
Under “condominialism,” however, both Palestinians and Jews “would be granted the right to settle anywhere within the territory of either of the two states, the two states thus forming a single, binational settlement community.”
Think about that for a minute.
As Nieli describes it, Palestinians “would have the right to settle anywhere within Israel just as Jews would have the right to settle anywhere within the territory of the Palestinian state.
Regardless of which of the two states they lived in, all Palestinians would be citizens of the Palestinian state, all Jews citizens of Israel.”
